ArtNews℗All-American Angst℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗22/03/2021℗℗Making my way through “Meditations on Melancholia,” Eric Fischl’s latest exhibition at Skarstedt, I remembered that there are still people who get a kick out of seeing the word “American” somewhere in an artwork’s title. Rarely can so much be gotten so cheaply—the four syllables supply shallow depth, insta-gravitas. Would moviegoers have shelled out a third of a billion dollars for something called Sniper? Would Beauty have won five Oscars? Decades later, would there be quite so much chatter about Gothic? Graffiti? Gigolo?The painting that reminded me of this is called American Hula (2020), and its title may or may not be a joke—it’s hard to tell with Fischl. Raised in the 1950s in white-bread Long Island, he hit his stride in the ’80s painting the milieu he knew best: swimming pools, emerald lawns, pale flesh prematurely aged by bourbon and sexual angst and who knows what else. Judging from any single canvas, Fischl’s feelings toward this subject matter might be mistaken for derision. With repetition, it inches closer to awe. The figure in American Hula towers over the horizon in bulgy, muscular nakedness. But he also happens to be hula-hooping—the silly red toy slashes across the middle of the canvas like graffiti on a gravestone. If, per the old Scott Fitzgerald saw, the test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposed ideas in the mind at once, Fischl gets full marks.Fischl’s late style is a risky combination of the overdetermined and the underdeveloped, the insisted upon and the gestured at. It felt right in this odd, excellent show. In interviews, Fischl suggested that the show’s title was a nod to Melancholia, the Lars von Trier film which ends (and begins!) with the destruction of the world. For these new paintings, he’s replaced pools and lawns with fields of illegible blue, so that his figures, once cozily imprisoned, are now unmoored. In Late America 2 (2020), a woman squeezes a child to her gut. The skies are black, the ocean nibbles at the land, we can’t see what the child looks like because it’s wrapped in an upside-down American flag—even without the title’s help, we’d know the end was nigh.Rereading my description of this painting, I can see that I’ve made it sound terrible, but part of the fun in Fischl’s recent work is seeing how far he can get with a terrible premise, how much life he can squeeze out of cold, dead allegory. On some level, he seems to understand this. Look at that title again—how “late” can Late America 2 be if it’s the newest installment in a series? (It’s worth bearing in mind that the first Late America, another queasy work featuring a boy wrapped in the flag, was completed more than four years ago, just after the 2016 election.) I’m reminded of something the anthropologist David Graeber was fond of saying: “Capitalism dies a more beautiful death with each passing year.”In an era when political topicality has become the rule for art, Fischl may be trying to get with the program, or else just pretending. Either way, he should keep it up—there aren’t many artists who paint flesh with the same furious invention. This show was a celebration of visual wonders: shimmering blues, velvety brushstrokes, bodies that seem to float and sink at the same time. Sometimes an artist has to pretend to be a politician in order to stay an aesthete. Here’s looking forward to Late America 3 in 2024.
ArtNews℗Participant Observers℗Darla Migan℗ArtinAmerica℗17/03/2021℗℗Louis H. Draper initiated the Black photography collective Kamoinge in Harlem in 1963, the name meaning “a group of people acting together,” along with Albert R. Fennar, James M. Mannas Jr., and Herbert Randall. Currently, the Whitney Museum exhibition “Working Together: The Photographers of the Kamoinge Workshop” presents 140 photographs by fourteen early members of the group. These participants had widely diverse geographic origins, social backgrounds, academic specialties, and technical skills. All shared, however, a will to depict the vivid complexity of the Black community, actively countering stereotypes in the era’s news media, art, and popular culture. Originally put together by associate curator Sarah L. Eckhardt of the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts (home of the now digitized Draper archive, acquired in 2015, which inspired this exhibition), “Working Together” focuses on the collective’s first twenty years, at the nexus of both the Civil Rights and Black Arts movements.At the entrance of the show’s Whitney iteration, organized by assistant curator Carrie Springer with curatorial assistant Mia Matthias, a video monitor runs a 2019 documentary featuring archival footage, along with recent interviews with nine of the collective’s founding members. In Anthony Barboza’s wall-size group portrait, mounted just before the entrance to the first of three adjoining galleries, some members smile playfully, while others wear more contemplative expressions, foreshadowing the exhibition’s breadth of interests, styles, and subjects.Barboza, the group’s youngest original member, has been one of its most dedicated archivists. His commitment to his fellow artists reinforces each of the three themes—Community, Abstraction/Surrealism, and Civil Rights—woven together to tell the story of the workshop’s development. Having arrived in New York an amateur photographer, Barboza trained in commercial photography, but he also makes images that transcend mainstream conventions. He shot Pensacola, Florida (1966), showing a dilapidated neon sign that spells out the word liberty, while stationed at a naval base not long after joining Kamoinge. Printed in black and white, the crooked letter B, a falling-down R, and a half-lit dangling E suggest, as Barboza says in the show’s introductory video, that “liberty was broken for us.” With members honing their skills in commissioned portraits, fashion photography, and photojournalism, debates inevitably arose over what subjects should be photographed, and how, as part of the celebration of Black culture. For example, does Randall’s Untitled (Lower East Side, NY), ca. 1960, an image of children playing among partially demolished tenements, strike viewers as demoralizing or simply true-to-life?Such disputes, which continue to this day, echo a major debate between W.E.B. Du Bois and Alain LeRoy Locke at the beginning of the twentieth century: Locke, a philosopher and educator, thought it important to show Negro lifeworlds in all their complicated humanity—the joys, pains, and even boredom of everyday life in both rural and urban locales. Du Bois, a social theorist and political activist, believed Black artists had a duty to offer only positive images of Negroes as ideal Americans.In the Civil Rights section of the exhibition, Adger Cowans’s Malcolm Speaks (1965), an aerial view of Malcolm X addressing an outdoor gathering, hangs near Draper’s Untitled (Black Muslims), ca. 1960s, in which the leader is pictured with both a young supporter and a police officer, all three caught in a single tight frame. These images, conveying more than a shoot-and-capture dispassion, communicate the photographers’ respect for their subjects in tense situations. They make us realize that Malcolm X used his poise as a physical manifestation of his vision for a just and dignified future both on- and offstage.Founded the same year that Kenya won independence from British rule, the Kamoinge Workshop cultivated an awareness of resistance actions against imperialism throughout the Black diaspora. Members photographed in locations from Hattiesburg, Mississippi (Randall), to Havana (Shawn Walker). Choosing the word “kamoinge” from the language of the Kikuyu people of Kenya reflects the collective’s anti-colonial, pan-Africanist ethos.Workshop members also shared a love of all the arts from music—see Herb Robinson’s blurred, quasi-abstract Miles Davis at the Village Vanguard (1961) and his glorious Mahalia Jackson (1969) swaying on an outdoor stage—to literature, manifested in mentorship by Langston Hughes, poet laureate of the Harlem Renaissance, and collaboration with the later Nobel Prize–winning novelist Toni Morrison (who wrote the foreword for the group’s inaugural Black Photographers Annual, 1973). Ming Smith, the first woman admitted to the collective, studied biology and chemistry in college and was modeling in New York when she joined Kamoinge in the early 1970s. In her video interview, Smith says she uses light like a painter, and we see her nearly catching intergalactic dimensions with the flare of a spangled cape in Sun Ra space II (1978). While her surrealist portraits of the musician-conjurer were her most stunning images in the exhibition, viewers were magnetically drawn to take a closer look at Sun Breeze After the Bluing, Hoboken, NJ (ca. 1972), a shot of laundry blowing on a clothesline that evokes a brief moment of repose in a fenced-in backyard.The Kamoinge photographers helped one another and their communities by building makeshift printing equipment, curating their own exhibitions, and teaching photography classes. Some did required military service; others risked being listed as Cold War dissidents by encouraging lifelong learning in Black neighborhoods. Cowans’s Egg Nude (1958), on view in the Abstraction/Surrealism section, represents the standard of excellence set for new members, who had to be voted in on the basis of their portfolio. The work shows a human figure coiled into an ovoid shape accentuated by a protective shadow. The body reads as grace personified, energy preparing to expand.The Draper archive at the VMFA in his hometown of Richmond, encompassing some 50,000 images, reminds us of the Kamoinge Workshop’s familial and political ties to the American South. At the Whitney, a much smaller number of works introduce visitors to the collective, and the historicizing of it lends the feel of a long-gone past quickly receding from the present. One got the impression that Kamoinge could have thrived only in that prior era of rising Black consciousness, now long dispersed by forces that include the assassinations of key 1960s Civil Rights leaders. Fortunately, Kamoinge has reconstituted itself, and many of its earlier members are now mentors to younger generations of photographers, all continuing to work together under the auspices of the nonprofit Kamoinge Inc. amid today’s resurgent demands for social justice.
ArtNews℗Showing What Has Been Forgotten℗Jessica Baran℗ArtinAmerica℗16/03/2021℗℗I first encountered Buzz Spector’s work in 1996 at the now defunct Roy Boyd Gallery in Chicago. The centerpiece of that show was Marcel Broodthaers’s catalogue raisonné transformed by Spector’s signature method of tearing each page in successive, jagged-edged vertical strips, from the centerfold outward. In this work he also painted the pages in white gesso. The knowledge-bearing resource becomes a perpetually open but unreadable object, richly symbolic but illegible in the conventional sense. I was completely enchanted. Here was a twinned desire for erudition and experimental art—aspirations coterminous with my own desperation to shed my small-town Indiana origins. At a time when the Midwest was still widely associated with regionalism or the “outsider” expressionism of groups like the Chicago Imagists, Spector seemed to be carving out a rare space for conceptual art and critical culture.Spector was born on Chicago’s Northside to a working-class Jewish family that prized books and reading. (His mother confessed to mild horror at his book-destroying art.) A prolific artist with an equally prodigious critical output, Spector co-founded and edited the legendary pocket-sized WhiteWalls: A Journal of Artist Writings (1978–87). Spector’s legacy as a critic, editor, and educator feels inseparable from his art. He has held more than fifteen teaching posts, his last being at Washington University in St. Louis, where he was known as a voluble supporter of artists both within and outside the university, at every stage of their careers; he retired in 2019.“Alterations” at the Saint Louis Art Museum, on view through May 31, is Spector’s first solo museum exhibition in the city where he lived for over a decade. It gathers forty-four works spanning his career, beginning with pencil drawings from the 1970s, where the artist followed the wavering, torn edge of a page to create overlapping columns of hatched graphite marks, and concluding with more recent series in which Spector collages author photos from the dust jackets of mass-market books to deconstruct the writerly aura. The inclusion of so many early and rarely exhibited drawings is a pleasure to see. Their focus on the mark suggests a foundational connection between drawing itself, the gesture of the tear, and the acts of writing and printing.But conspicuously absent are Spector’s most significant book alterations that refer to the history of the avant-garde, such the Broodthaers work or Malevich: With Eight Red Rectangles (1991), a white board with recesses that mimic a Suprematist composition paired with red-covered books matching the hollows in shape and size (this latter work is currently on view at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago). “Alterations” does include some manipulated books. White Insistence (2009) is titled after a poem by Michael Burkard, in which the white poet reflects on the pervasive whiteness—hair, dress, shoes, words—of an old acquaintance. The text was reprinted by Spector, then bound and torn. Face to Face (2000) alters Japanese artist Ken Ohara’s 1970 book One, a celebrated work anthologizing close-cropped portraits of a diverse array of anonymous New Yorkers. Spector’s tears reduce the book’s imagery to a static, side-by-side display of two faces of indeterminate race and gender. A Passage (1994) contains a book page written by Spector in which the artist attempts to explain his art to an old friend from Hebrew school, who says the work reminds him of “a scholar so erudite” he knew where each letter fell on every page of the Talmud. To which Spector replies, “I’m no scholar, then . . . these books only show what I’ve forgotten.”It’s hard not to interpret the show’s selections and omissions as revisionist interventions intended to reframe Spector’s predominantly white, male Eurocentricity as an interrogation of the whiteness of systems of knowledge and their endemic nostalgias and amnesias. Two gallery walls lined with six works from Spector’s “Authors” series (1998)—in which he reprinted bound sets of found author photos that he then tore down to wedgelike glyphs and placed on wall-hung lecterns—confronts the viewer like an accidental Rorschach test: does one see in these white faces the oppressive homogeneity of the Euro-American literary canon or a venerable and enviable tradition?Neither the exhibition literature nor Spector’s extensive reflections on his own work allude to social institutional critique as a key aspect of his practice. Rather, Spector usually positions the book as an object of longing and fetishization. He has eroticized books, analogizing them to vulnerable female bodies to be manipulated by the (male) artist. That tendency has mostly been left out of this show. The only vestiges appear in a small, hand-bound letterpress book entitled Between the Sheets (2003) and Encyclopedia (1982), a torn reference volume with an unmistakably phallic rock resting in its center crease.Is this the “forgetting” implied in A Passage? The exhibition, in what it does and does not reveal, calls into question the racialized and gendered meaning of Spector’s performance of conceptual art tropes—which, in addition to being characterized by a desaturated “white” aesthetic, also traded heavily in language “perversions” in the form of misogynist double-entendres. A new, critical dimension emerges in “Alterations.” The show seems to argue that deconstructing systems of knowledge while overlooking how whiteness defines and wields the very notion of “knowledge” dooms one to wander the Library of Babel. I see in Spector a Gatsby-like character enthralled by self-invention, the possibility that the voracious consumption of the Euro-American canon could transform the hayseed Franklin (his given name) into the bona fide conceptualist Buzz. I’ve certainly fallen for this myth myself, and spent many years blind to its tragic nature. What makes this exhibition so important is the opportunity it provides for a reckoning, with the self or the institution, however thorny it may be.
ArtNews℗Whose Planet Is It Anyway?℗Dennis Zhou℗ArtinAmerica℗11/03/2021℗℗The twelfth edition of the Taipei Biennial, “You and I Don’t Live on the Same Planet,” co-organized by French philosopher Bruno Latour and Paris-based curator Martin Guinard, reflects the fracturing of our global imaginary in the face of accelerating climate change. Drawing on the work of numerous scientists and other experts, the duo offers four curatorial sections that represent, in effect, four types of people: those who maintain their faith in globalization; those who want to retreat into national borders; those who are building bunkers or absconding to Mars; and finally, those who struggle to invent new forms of sustainable living on Earth. Together, the works by fifty-seven participants from more than twenty countries, on view through March 14 at the Taipei Fine Arts Museum, thus present four competing futures for our planet.The artists on Planet Globalization, as Latour and Guinard call the first section, try to render visible the abstract notion of a worldwide economic system and culture. The Los Angeles-based design collective MILLIØNS, for example, has compiled an analysis tracing the global supply chains behind Mies van der Rohe’s Seagram Building in Manhattan. Other contributors employ a globalized aesthetic, such as mainland Chinese artist Cui Jie, who offers hyperkinetic paintings of postmodern architecture, and Taiwan’s Huang Hai-hsin, whose cartoonish paintings and drawings capture crowded commercial activities or, as in the case of After Art Basel (2020), their sobering aftermath. In a collaborative installation, two French contributors, Franck Leibovici, a poet and artist, and Julien Seroussi, a former analyst at the International Criminal Court, present ICC documentation of the 2003 Bogoro village massacre in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Visitors are invited to use magnet boards to rearrange the papers, thereby extracting their own narrative of the event, in which some 200 civilians were slaughtered, and their own war-crimes dossiers. Mika Rottenberg’s video Cosmic Generator (AP), 2017, imagines a wormhole between a Chinese restaurant in Mexicali and a wholesale plastics store in China, replicating the ease of movement of goods and ideas in which the globe-trotting, New York-based, Argentine-Israeli artist herself partakes.The exhibition unfortunately falters when contending with the reactionary forces recently working against globalization. Planet Security is largely dedicated to the Dutch artist and scholar Jonas Staal’s dissection of the propagandistic films of Steve Bannon. While this stark lineup of video screens efficiently deconstructs the alt-right provocateur’s verbal and visual rhetoric, it largely avoids engaging with the emotional vulnerabilities of the people he exploits.Constituting the whole of Planet Escape, Corrupted Air—Act VI (2019), by Holland’s Femke Herregraven, resembles a sleek, hi-tech panic room, a so-called billionaire’s bunker, complete with bedframes, monitors, and ambient soundtrack. Adding to the eeriness, skeletal projections of extinct animals converse about the “last man” in the midst of this elite survivalist environment.The greatest number of participants are in the Planet Terrestrial section, which is separated into two loci: the Critical Zone, whose name refers to the thin surface layer of the earth, where all life transpires between the rock crust and the atmosphere; and Gaia, dubbed with a term (the name of the ancient Greek earth goddess) that microbiologist Lynne Margulis and inventor James Lovelock applied in 1979 to the planetary system of human beings, other animals, plants, and microbes, conceived as a living whole. To their strength, many of these participants deal specifically with Taiwan, which is at the forefront of the climate crisis. London-based Territorial Agency’s installation “Oceans in Transformation” (2020) tracks maritime routes, oil and gas extraction sites, and fishing activity surrounding the island on large-scale monitors. Taiwanese artist Chang Yung-ta—following a residency at Taroko Gorge, where an observatory monitors the health of the earth’s surface—has created a simulacrum of the process by which river basins are forged. Cemelesai Takivalet, a local Indigenous artist, has made large-scale wall paintings of bacteria and viruses, reminding viewers of human susceptibility to natural forces, both small and immense. Indeed, the participants who have created the strongest artworks in this exhibition are precisely those attuned to Indigenous, regional, or even hyperlocal concerns and methods. They address global ecology not by claiming the bird’s-eye view, nor by transmitting data points through a PowerPoint-like presentation, but by utilizing mimesis, parable, visual metaphor, and other tools of poiesis by which a symbolic whole can be conjured from selected parts. Upon entering the museum, visitors are greeted by the Mexican artist Fernando Palma Rodríguez’s serene Nahua-inspired, mechanical-animal hybrid sculptures, which glide around the lobby, demonstrating the compatibility of the manmade and the natural. Likewise, the Paiwan artist Aruwai Kaumakan’s large woven sculptures of fabric, metal, and glass employ techniques rooted in her tribe in Southern Taiwan. To truly think “terrestrially,” these artists suggest, we need to value those elements of an artwork that are least easily transferrable in the global art market. The time has come to reorient our vision “Down to Earth,” as Latour titled his 2018 treatise on politics in the “new climactic regime.” “If it is a matter of multiplying viewpoints so as to complicate all ‘provincial’ or ‘closed’ views with new variants,” he writes, “it is a fight that deserves to be fought.”In order to do that, however, we need to eschew the instant legibility of a uniform “global art”—instantly legible, that is, to a select few—and develop a greater appreciation for the local and regional. Artists like Palma Rodríguez and Aruwai may not have a solution to the worldwide crisis, but they know it will be found by paying attention to what’s immediately around us, beneath our feet, and above our head.
ArtNews℗Head Case℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗10/03/2021℗℗George Condo hasn’t written many artist’s statements lately, which isn’t a bad thing. Quite the contrary—most artist statements are dull to read, and read as if they were even duller to write; why they exist at all is a timeless riddle. At this point in his career, Condo presumably does very few things he doesn’t want to do. So the fact that “George Condo: Internal Riot,” at Hauser & Wirth, came with a few paragraphs courtesy of the man himself suggests that this is no formality; either some publicist is holding a gun to his head, or he’s writing from the heart. A sample: “The virus turned deadly. . . . The protests were justified. I protested with my paintings. In a psychological sense, I lit them on fire and turned them upside down in revolt and sickness.”This isn’t the usual BS about topoi and temporalities, but it doesn’t leave me quivering with anticipation, either. My least favorite Condo is “relevant” Condo, the Condo of fish-in-a-barrel social satire and joyless Zeitgeist hunting. His new paintings may not be as on-the-nose as the fat, smirking bankers he began painting during the recession in 2008, but they have that same misplaced confidence. The works in “Internal Riot” (all 2020) depict heads—calling them portraits isn’t quite right—decked out in googly eyes and snaggleteeth. The technique is uneven, but the size and brazenness connote capital-I Importance, and there’s an implicit “You’re welcome,” as if Condo’s half-assmanship were a response to COVID-19, or Breonna Taylor, or whatever.Sickness—every kind—has been a theme of Condo’s work since he started out in the 1980s, but at his best he makes it stick-in-your-throat unsettling. Here, it’s just sick. Compare Hysteria (2020), an extra-crude, Cookie Monster–blue head from the new show, with a vintage Condo like Batman and Bunny (2005), in which the comic book hero poses with a Gorgon-faced Playboy bunny. A few of these paintings’ parts are similar—the glistening eyes, the five-sided grins—but there’s something enthrallingly just out-of-reach in the older work, a dash of technical refinement that makes its horrors easier to choke down, yet no less horrific. It’s genuinely hysterical. Hysteria, on the other hand, is so screechily self-defining it fades away well before you’re finished looking.Odd to say about a show called “Internal Riot,” but Condo’s new paintings have no subconscious; what you see is pretty much what you get. The show’s drawings, on the other hand, reveal their secrets a little at a time and are much the better for it. The major motifs are the same, but here, Condo works them into dense abstractions, making smart use of negative space and precisely spare color. “Subtle” isn’t the right word for Appearances, a bright thicket of eyes, teeth, and faces with a dash of Kandinsky to boot, but it takes its time where Hysteria rushes ahead. Condo’s images can be divided into two groups: those that seem to begin with some pop culture artifact we already recognize and then gnaw it apart; and those that seem to begin with scribbles that barely qualify as images but cohere until we almost recognize them. I’m not sure Condo has ever paired these two kinds of images more skillfully than he does in the new drawings—look at the heart-faced beauty at the center of Appearances, and then look at the cackling monsters all around her. Condo gives us a calm, creeping horror, half coming-together and half coming-apart, and it’s a sharper riposte to his own recent paintings than I can manage.
ArtNews℗Memento Mori Can Be Fun℗David Ebony℗ArtinAmerica℗09/03/2021℗℗A disparate assortment of paintings, works on paper, and sculptures, plus several vitrines full of memorabilia, the show “Doomed and Famous” samples an eccentric art collection that engagingly—and quite precisely—reflects the life and times of its eccentric owner. Hung salon style at Miguel Abreu’s Orchard Street gallery, the items belong to the London-born critic, curator, sometime actor, onetime Flash Art editor, and full-time bon vivant Adrian Dannatt, who assembled them over the course of some four decades.Most of the works are small or medium-size, including a number of intimate portraits of Dannatt by art world colleagues, such as Duncan Hannah, Ena Swansea, and Walter Robinson—the last, channeling Courbet’s The Desperate Man for his striking likeness. Also among the show’s highlights are abstractions by artist friends like Jan Frank, Paul Pagk, and Olivier Mosset. Yet the exhibition, on view through March 13, is neither a self-aggrandizing autobiographical exercise nor a strictly commercial effort. The collection was clearly not put together for the sake of monetary gain. It features, rather, a surprising number of crosscurrents—art historical and personal—that lend the show considerable conceptual weight, and a rather broad appeal.Several works on view are of significant critical interest, such as Richard Smith’s imposing Slices (1964), a key example of British abstract Pop. One of the late artist’s first shaped-canvas compositions, this eight-foot-tall arrangement of jagged panels in hot pink, trimmed with scallop motifs of turquoise and other bright hues, has appeared in public only once before—in “The Shaped Canvas,” a 1964 exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum in New York. Directly after the show, the work was acquired by art book publisher Harry N. Abrams. In a gallery printout and online commentary, Dannatt offers provenance details like this, and also shares personal anecdotes and reminiscences about each work. In this case, he notes that Smith himself hung the painting in Dannatt’s Tribeca loft, after the two had become friends and neighbors.Dannatt mentions that Donald Judd wrote appreciatively about Smith’s shaped canvases of this period. The ghost of a Judd artwork is also present in the exhibition. One morning in the early 1990s, Dannatt rescued from Judd’s Spring Street studio trash a large plywood object closely resembling one of the artist’s signature Minimalist sculptures. Whether or not it was a studio reject remains a mystery. With tongue in cheek, Dannatt simply states in the provenance note that the object “came directly from Judd’s building.”The fact that Slices had been in Abrams’s collection greatly appealed to Dannatt, and the connections he makes among visual art, writing, and publishing form a constant thread that unites the show. Published to coincide with the exhibition, Doomed and Famous is a book of Dannatt’s obituaries that appeared over the years in the Art Newspaper, The Independent, Artcritical, and elsewhere. Among the entries are write-ups for art world luminaries like Alexander Iolas, Dorothea Tanning, Ray Johnson, Martin Kippenberger, James Lee Byars, Rene Ricard, and lesser-known figures, such as dealer Guillaume Gallozzi, who died of brain cancer in 1995, age 37. Gallozzi always hung works salon style in his New York townhouse gallery—a look that Dannatt aimed for in this show. An Adam Fuss photo portrait of Gallozzi, from 1992, featured in “Doomed and Famous,” pays further homage to Dannatt’s close friend. The work adds to the underlying elegiac—though by no means morbid—tone of the exhibition.In the introduction to the book, which was published by the gallery’s Sequence Press, Dannatt mentions that years ago a friend dubbed him an "obituarist," a term he does not disclaim. On the contrary, he has a sideline project, “Living Obit,” in which obituaries may be commissioned by the subjects while they are still alive and can collaborate with him. At the end of Doomed and Famous, Dannatt includes his own obituary. He writes that one of his “largest collections was of people, the odder and more improbable the better . . .” The people and objects that inhabit the exhibition “Doomed and Famous” may be specific to Dannatt, but the way they were acquired over the course of a lifetime might pertain to everyone.
ArtNews℗Learning from Ljubljana℗Rachel Wetzler℗ArtinAmerica℗04/03/2021℗℗In April 1972, a crate containing several dozen works of mail art by international artists arrived at the Student Center Gallery in Zagreb. The works had originally been assembled by the French critic Jean-Marc Poinsot for a special section of the seventh Biennale de Paris the previous year; Poinsot’s “Section des envois” proved popular—and portable—enough to warrant a tour. But when visitors arrived at the Zagreb exhibition, titled “Postal Packages,” the gallery walls were bare. What viewers found instead was the unopened crate sitting on the floor. As the gallery’s director, Želimir Koščević, wrote in an accompanying statement, “Instead of contributing to the further commodification of conceptual art, and instead of helping in its ruin under the spotlights of galleries and museums, we have exhibited here the content of this exhibition in its genuine unadulterated state.” For Koščević, presenting an exhibition of mail art precisely as it had arrived by mail was less a gesture of conceptual one-upmanship than a barbed comment on the ease with which Conceptual art, despite its radical anti-institutional posturing, had been assimilated into the conventional structures of the art world, emblematized by enshrinement at the Paris biennale.This critical outlook was characteristic of the loose movement of Yugoslav artists known as the New Art Practice, whose participants arrived at Conceptual art contemporaneously with their Western counterparts in the mid-1960s but quickly became disillusioned with its limited horizons: the dematerialization of the art object had expanded the range of activities recognized as art, but had not substantively shifted the underlying structures and values shaping their circulation and reception. Embracing the principles of Yugoslav self-management socialism—a system in which workers were given direct control over their workplaces, in contrast to the centralized authority of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union—the artists associated with the New Art Practice attempted to cast off what they saw as outmoded artistic and institutional conventions, reflective of a “middle class Weltanschauung,” in order to forge an authentically social role for art. If their hopes for self-management were ultimately dashed by the end of the 1970s, the social and intellectual climate of these years nevertheless produced an art scene of extraordinary vitality, nurturing the early careers of artists like Sanja Iveković, Marina Abramović, Braco Dimitrijević, and Mladen Stilinović, among many others.The New Art Practice was crucially aided by a network of regionally anomalous institutions that sprang up throughout the federation’s major cities in the postwar years: Student Cultural Centers like the one that played host to “Postal Packages.” These state-funded spaces, attached to universities, were effectively handed over to young artists and critics. In A Slow Burning Fire: The Rise of the New Art Practice in Yugoslavia, London-based art historian Marko Ilić focuses on the catalytic role these state youth institutions played, arguing that they served not only as venues for Yugoslavia’s experimental artists, but as a kind of testing ground where they could work out what self-management might mean when applied to the sphere of art. Organized roughly chronologically, the book’s chapters unfold as a series of regional case studies, examining activities that took place within the orbit of youth organizations in Zagreb, Belgrade, Novi Sad, Ljubljana, and Sarajevo, respectively, from the mid-1960s to the late 1980s.The student centers attest to the comparatively permissive atmosphere of Yugoslavia, where artists did not face the kinds of strict state regulation of artistic production and circulation typical of the Soviet bloc. However, they have often been described in retrospect, both by art historians and by participating artists, as “marginal” spaces or “artistic ghettos,” circumscribed arenas where artists were allowed to operate with relative freedom because they had little chance of reaching a mass audience. (By contrast, Yugoslav writers and especially filmmakers faced much stricter censorship.) Ilić does not so much contest this view as attempt to nuance it, stressing how these spaces served as conduits for the circulation of artworks and ideas between the federation’s previously disconnected regional scenes, as well as internationally.Though the first Student Cultural Centers opened in the late 1950s to accommodate Yugoslavia’s rapidly expanding student demographic, they were not associated with particularly adventurous programming until Koščević took over the Zagreb gallery in 1966. Over the next several years, he organized a series of unconventional exhibitions intended to challenge the notion that “a gallery should cater to the petty-bourgeois who will enter its halls on a Sunday afternoon, feeling the greatest respect and piety for every moldy piece of rag, for every polished plank, for every carefully cleaned pebble,” as he wrote in a 1964 essay. In addition to curatorial interventions like “Postal Packages” and “The Exhibition of Women and Men” (1969)—an empty gallery accompanied by an exhortation for viewers to “be the exhibition itself”—Koščević opened the space to young student artists who rejected the sedate “socialist modernism” dominating the city’s art academy. Dimitrijević’s installation Suma 180 (1969), for instance, selected through an open call, comprised several hundred painted tin cans strewn across the gallery floor, inevitably disturbed as viewers traversed the space. Increasingly, the gallery’s projects took place outside the space itself, in the form of actions and urban interventions like Boris Bućan and Davor Tomičić’s Total Action (1970), for which the artists pasted abstract posters over outdoor advertisements across the city. Declaring these zones as “action spaces,” they handed out leaflets printed with their “Draft Decree on the Democratization of Art,” which called for the abolition of painting, sculpture, and other conventional artistic disciplines and declared that “there should be no exhibitions in galleries, museums, and art pavilions.”As Ilić outlines, the New Art Practice emerged against the backdrop of sweeping economic reforms that reintroduced market measures and loosened restrictions on foreign trade and investment, resulting in class stratification that chipped away at the egalitarian promise of self-management and fanned the flames of nationalist movements. Amid an atmosphere of rising youth unemployment and social inequality, a wave of student occupations erupted in June 1968, beginning at Belgrade University before spreading to cities across the federation, with protesters denouncing the “red bourgeoisie” of party and managerial elites and demanding a fuller implementation of self-management principles. The occupations had a galvanizing effect on the New Art Practice artists, particularly in Belgrade, where an informal group of art students—Abramović, Era Milivojević, Neša Paripović, Zoran Popović, Raša Todosijević, and Gergelj Urkom—began gathering at the new Student Cultural Center, established as a concession to the protesters. The Belgrade student center, whose director, Dunja Blažević, was from Zagreb, fostered contacts with like-minded artists in other Yugoslav cities and abroad, particularly the New York branch of Art & Language, through a series of annual events, the April Meetings and “October” exhibitions, the latter staged in response to the conservatism of the city’s official October Salons.For the most notorious of these alternative salons, held in 1975, the gallery remained closed: in lieu of an exhibition of artworks, artists and critics were invited to contribute polemical texts to a publication reflecting on the role of art and institutions and art’s place within self-management. Oktobar 75 caused a rift in the gallery’s circle, between those who believed that art had to be relentlessly “negative, critical, both towards the external world and in relation to its own language” if it was to be more than “an apology [for] the status quo,” as Popović wrote in his manifesto-like contribution, “For a Self-Managing Art,” and the analytical conceptualists of the newly formed Grupa 143, who chafed at the idea that art’s purpose was ultimately political.Similar tensions played out elsewhere in Yugoslavia as it became increasingly difficult for artists to remain optimistic about self-management. By the mid-1970s, Ilić writes, a system designed to eradicate alienation and exploitation had been “distorted into a hybrid combination of regressive socialism and market deregulation.” In 1974 Yugoslavia introduced a sprawling new constitution that simultaneously decentralized the federation, granting greater autonomy to the individual republics, while shoring up the power of the party itself through an expansion of the state bureaucracy. It was followed by the Associated Labor Law of 1976, which reorganized factories and other enterprises into “working communities” that would, in theory, coordinate planning and production, but in practice tended to encourage internal competition and gridlock. Some artists, like Zagreb’s Group of Six Authors (Mladen Stilinović, Sven Stilinović, Zeljko Jerman, Boris Demur, Vlado Martek, and Fedor Vučemilović), whose members had previously been affiliated with the Zagreb student center, relocated their activities outside formal institutions. Conceived as a framework for cooperation among individuals rather than a collective with a shared program, the group staged numerous self-organized “Exhibition-Actions” in public spaces throughout the city between 1975 and 1980, with each participant solely responsible for his own contribution. Others withdrew from art altogether, among them the Belgrade-based Goran Đorđević, who, in 1979, wrote to a range of notable artists and culture workers, such as Hans Haacke and Lucy Lippard, unsuccessfully soliciting their participation in an international artists’ strike.While Ilić is hardly the first to emphasize the formative significance of the Student Cultural Centers, his book’s main achievement is its extensive contextualization of these activities within the era’s tumultuous political and economic climate. His comparative approach situates the New Art Practice as a pan-Yugoslav phenomenon with different local manifestations, accounting for the distinctive character of each particular scene and the varying circumstances they worked within. The interests of Novi Sad’s Grupa KôD, for instance, whose members were primarily literature students, skewed toward structural linguistics and experimental publishing, while Ljubljana’s student center, which opened belatedly in 1978, was closely associated with the city’s burgeoning punk subculture. Particularly valuable is the chapter devoted to understudied developments in Sarajevo: in the 1980s, a makeshift “student center” appeared at Zvono, a bar near the city’s art academy, whose elderly owner invited students to present their work in the absence of any other venue for emerging artists. Based in the federation’s poorest and most underdeveloped republic, the artists who gathered at Zvono lacked access to the sort of cultural infrastructure available to their counterparts in other cities—the art academy itself wasn’t founded until 1972—but nevertheless managed to organize the largest exhibition of contemporary art ever held in Yugoslavia, at Sarajevo’s Collegium Artisticum in 1987. Given the punning title “Jugoslovensko Dokumenta,” the show featured more than 140 artists from across the country, representing, Ilić argues, a “clear counterpoint to nationalist and xenophobic currents” that would, within a few years, lead to Yugoslavia’s brutal dissolution.However, individual artworks and artists’ projects tend to get lost in these chapters, more often than not invoked to illustrate a point about political developments rather than taken as objects of study in their own right. His readings afford artists a striking lack of agency, giving the impression that for every exhibition, performance, and project, there is a corresponding speech, party purge, or economic shudder, as if artists were continually doomed to reproduce some microcosmic version of the political dramas playing out on the national stage on the level of form and social organization alike.In the end, A Slow Burning Fire is less concerned with the work of the New Art Practice artists than with exploring how Yugoslavia’s long decline reverberated culturally. In the conclusion, Ilić suggests that Yugoslavia’s fate might serve as both a lesson and a warning, at a moment when ethno-nationalism is once again ascendant, capitalizing on the resentments of those left behind by neoliberal deregulation and austerity measures. It is unsurprising, he writes, that “in the background of receding welfare states—when cutbacks almost seem inevitable and a kind of permanent economic state of emergency has become normalized—the Yugoslav project and its powerful symbolism of anti-imperial struggle, its experimental culture, and its independent path to socialism has once again captured the imagination of international audiences.” Cautioning against both romanticization and defeatism, Ilić suggests we might learn as much from the New Art Practice’s contradictions and failures as from its emancipatory aspirations. This article appears in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 24–26.
ArtNews℗Gilded Labor℗Madeline Weisburg℗ArtinAmerica℗03/03/2021℗℗“The Confusion of Tongues!,” Harry Gould Harvey IV’s solo exhibition at Bureau, offers a collection of idiosyncratic objects that feel devotional and also a little diabolical, given their swirling coded texts, barbed gothic embellishments, and mystic flair. The multi-element The Space between Your Temples Lay the House of Whose Name Could Never Be Spoken, one of the first works that visitors encounter in the show, is staged in an alcove resembling a side chapel, centered on what looks like a small openwork reliquary adorned with several hearts and a peace sign with a spikey sunburst aureole. But the strength of these new works, all from 2021, extends beyond their mischievous aesthetic. Harvey’s primary focus is not simply creating physical objects but boring into the material memory that his mediums contain—in this case a charred eighteenth-century kneeler from a Providence church, a can of Portuguese sardines, used motor oil, cast bronze, and wood foraged from the Gilded Age seaside mansions of Newport, Rhode Island. Together, such materials evoke backstories of artisanship and labor, economic decline, and the cycles of American industry.The history of labor along New England’s southern coast impels this body of work, gathered under a title alluding to the Tower of Babel myth. Harvey is based in his native city of Fall River, Massachusetts, an area once known for its abundant textile mills and granite quarries, which made the town prosperous—and a magnet for immigrants—before nineteenth-century expansion collapsed into twentieth-century deindustrialization. When dynastic industrialist families began to erect lavish summer homes in Newport in a confusion of Gothic Revival, Renaissance, and French Baroque styles (incredibly, more than one house is modelled in part after Versailles), laborers were brought in from nearby working-class cities like Fall River to build and embellish these structures, anonymously. The show's sculptural works, all lengthily and rather enigmatically titled—A Proposal for a New StⒶttue of Liberty toward the Epoch of Ⓐ  New ‘G*d’; So I Hope Her Soul Has Gone to Rest and Away in Heaven She’ll Go Oh Away Away in Heaven and Away from the Burning Mills; and I Was Standing in a Window a Calling My Mother’s Name Crying Mother Mother Save Me as I Fell Back in the Flame—are constructed from reclaimed neo-Gothic corbels and other architectural elements salvaged from the grounds of such a mansion, and then painstakingly transformed through a process of stripping, charring, burning, and re-furnishing with hand-cast bronze supports and ornamentation. Even Harvey’s diagrammatic drawings, like the ethereal, red-and-black Knot Ⓐ   Line Left in the Sky of Where the Birds Had Flown, which mixes natural and geometric forms, are framed by jagged carved wood from the famed Newport “summer cottages.”Today, as enormous restoration efforts are under way to preserve examples of American residential architecture, there is still little public support for conserving the country’s industrial complexes in cities like Fall River, despite their significance in economic history. The social inequity of this distinction is critiqued through Harvey’s methods of production and display. As the artist writes in an “appendix” available at the gallery and on its website, his process, honoring the value of craft tradition, involves “taking control of” and “reconfiguring” once socially discriminatory forms. Yet what is most salient about “The Confusion of Tongues!” is the reverence that the works invite in viewers, who are asked to stand before altarpieces to unseen labor.
ArtNews℗When Process Becomes Form℗Lilly Wei℗ArtinAmerica℗02/03/2021℗℗The parking lot of Perfect Bodies, a former auto repair shop in Red Hook, hosted an identically titled exhibition by the Mexican-born artist Bosco Sodi. Presented by the nearby Brooklyn nonprofit Pioneer Works and curated by Dakin Hart, senior curator of the Noguchi Museum and Sculpture Garden in Long Island City, it stopped viewers in their tracks. The show was visible anytime through a chain-link fence, but open to the public only on weekends, or by appointment: pandemic rules. But either way, art outdoors was a much-needed boon.Sodi, a prolific artist with a nearly thirty-year career and an international profile, is best known for two types of work. His jumbo-size monochrome paintings are bulked up with brilliantly colored pigments, their cracked surfaces resembling natural phenomena. His powerful primary structures in a variety of materials are often equally vivid in hue. With a studio in Red Hook, Sodi is a longtime presence in this industrial waterfront neighborhood, where fishing less than perfect bodies out of the surrounding bay was once not uncommon.The installation’s two dozen mottled, irregular clay forms—cuboids and spheroids of various sizes, some weighing upward of 1,000 pounds—were erratically beautiful, depending on the available light. They occupied the space with charismatic assurance, as if they had just touched down from locations unknown, from once and future time zones, like those in a Ted Chiang sci-fi story. These works might seem at home in a wild, overgrown field in a remote region of the world, like remnants of an ancient (or alien) culture stumbled upon by chance. But they were more startling here, where the contrasting industrial site and the handcrafted objects, each a challenge to the other, increased the formal tension. Meanwhile, the fissures in the parking lot pavement reinforced the artist’s signature theme, suggesting that despite our ingenuity and best efforts, nature eventually has its way with us.So why not collaborate? Sodi—deeply engrossed by process, organic materials, and experimentation—is adept at knowing when and how to let go. Antoni Tàpies is a hero of his, as is Joan Miró, and traces of l’art informel, Gutai, Zen Buddhist art, Abstract Expressionism, Earth art, and other self-surrendering movements are evident in his work. The sourcing of his pigments and other materials, which come from all over the world, is essential to Sodi’s practice. In this instance, the clay was from Oaxaca, where he has a studio in Puerto Escondido, the site of the Tadao Ando–designed international residency he founded in 2014.The sculptures were fired there in improvised outdoor kilns on the beach and trucked to Brooklyn across the Mexico-United States border, in a kind of symbolic immigration. Their earthy colors, the palette of cave paintings and prehistoric pottery, and their bruised, broken skins—sometimes powdered and gritty, sometimes slicked with patches of glaze—are all contingent, depending on the fortuities of the process. Perfect in their imperfection, these works proclaim Sodi’s belief in the non-duplicatable, the incomplete, and, perhaps most affirmatively during the turmoil of thepast year, the ongoing.
ArtNews℗Irresistibly Weird℗Madeline Weisburg℗ArtinAmerica℗26/02/2021℗℗Bay Area artist Joan Brown, who died in 1990 at age fifty-two, produced a vast body of figurative paintings with an offbeat, vernacular appeal. This exhibition at Venus Over Manhattan featured a dozen of Brown’s dazzling canvases, primarily from the 1970s, characterized by dreamily composed scenes and highly stylized figures.Brown emerged within San Francisco’s Beat and burgeoning “Funk” art scenes of the 1960s, alongside friends such as Jay DeFeo, Bruce Conner, and Wallace Berman. She and her cohort took pride in flouting the artistic conventions dominant in New York and Los Angeles at the time, making expressive, idiosyncratic work that served as an irreverent retort to the detached slickness of Minimalism and Finish Fetish. Despite her underground credentials, Brown’s subject matter is often bracingly banal: domestic scenes, dancing couples, swimmers, animal portraits, pictures of her husband. But the allure of Brown’s work is how it unsettles viewers’ assumptions about such mundane subject matter: Woman Waiting in a Restaurant (1975), for instance, depicts little more than what is described in the title, but the painting’s acid palette and mannered central figure, who appears motionless, as if in a trance, give this everyday scene a vague sense of menace.Brown’s best moments—the funniest, the weirdest, the most irresistible—are romantic and awkwardly affected at the same time, sweet and nostalgic but also airless. Take the large 1975 canvas Woman Preparing for a Shower, which greets visitors at the exhibition’s entrance. Standing against a striking backdrop of electric turquoise bath tile, a shower-capped woman with long red nails prepares to remove her robe, while her companion—a stringy pet dog standing on its hind legs—waits with a checkered towel in its mouth. The expressionless figure is frozen in a contorted stance, heightening the scene’s subtle strangeness. In another work, Let’s Dance (1976), a dining couple in the foreground is set against a flat cerulean ground, while the silhouettes of dancing figures in the distance float alongside a piano player. A hand extends from the painting’s right edge to fill the male diner’s wineglass; no one seems to notice that his partner’s glass has tipped over, leaving a large red stain drifting down the sides of the tablecloth. The sentimentality of these scenes is tempered by the figures’ stilted poses and the stiffness of Brown’s painterly technique, giving the works a surreal, dreamlike quality. Not all the paintings pulled this off: Dancers in a City #4 (1973), for instance, a large-scale diptych depicting a trio of colorful silhouettes dancing, an urban skyline in the background, possesses an unironic goofiness that reads as pantomime. Grey Wolf with Red Clouds and Dark Tree (1968), a rendering of a spellbound wolf staring out against a noxious red skyline, similarly lacks the bizarre interiority that makes the rest of the show so enchanting.Indeed, the show’s strongest works all struck me as self-portraits, in one way or another. Some, like The Swimmers #1 (Diving) and The Swimmers #2 (The Crawl), 1973, a pair of beguiling canvases in which flat, faceless silhouettes move through nearly monochrome grounds of green water, directly allude to aspects of her life—in this case, her passion for the titular sport—while more fantastical scenes, such as Woman Preparing for a Shower, seem like exteriorizations of the self. Only one was explicitly identified as such: Self-Portrait in Fur Hat (1972). Posing in a paint-spattered shirt against a checkerboard ground, she appears paralyzed in a position of clenched stillness, staring past the viewer, as if lost in her own world.
ArtNews℗Eyes Like Goya's℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗24/02/2021℗℗Nearly two centuries after his death, Goya is still worth fighting over. He forces you to pick sides, dares you to claim him for your own. Critics can’t tame him, but they’ll set him on their opponents like an attack dog. For the young John Berger, Goya was the nemesis of glib midcentury Parisian cynicism. For Robert Hughes, he was the nemesis of glib Manhattan postmodernism. For cultural commentator Jason Farago, writing in the New York Times recently, he makes a mockery of glib online virtue signaling. Fair points all, though it’s much easier to see what Goya is against than to define what he is. Is he the last old master or the first modernist? Realist or dreamer? Is his motto, “I saw it,” a simple statement of fact vis-à-vis the wreckage of the Napoleonic Wars, or a subtler boast about his vivid imagination? The only thing everyone seems to agree on: there was nothing glib about him.“Goya’s Graphic Imagination,” a Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition featuring more than a hundred of the artist’s drawings and prints, takes sides with its very title. “Imagination” lends a faint favoritism to Goya the dreamer, Goya the granddaddy of Buñuel and Beckmann and Bacon. Tellingly, the show’s online header features the 1818 aquatint Seated Giant, one of his most nakedly fantastic creations—the wall text helps you to situate this work in its place and time (possibly as an allusion to the violence that tore Spain apart when Goya was in his sixties), but no amount of history or biography could explain it. This show is crammed with drawings of witches, monsters, cadavers, and mangled body parts—clearly, Goya’s imagination was graphic. But before his pictures could be vividly gory he had to submit himself to the staid art of draftsmanship—and the story of how he transcended that submission, his journey from graphic to graphic, is the one the Met has opted to tell.The earliest prints in the show, from the 1770s and ’80s, are apprentice works, fussily Baroque in their fealty to Velázquez. By the 1810s, Goya has almost emptied out his compositions, but they’re tautly empty, never wasting a line. (Susan Sontag, who favored the realist Goya, called the landscapes in his prints “atmospheres.”) The etching And There Is No Help (1810) shows blindfolded Spanish captives in the split-second before execution—notice how the three rifle barrels intruding from the right clarify the surrounding blackness, emphasizing the robotic French firing squad in the middle distance.And There Is No Help is the fifteenth plate of “The Disasters of War,” Goya’s most famous print series. Amply represented at the Met, the suite dramatizes the clash of two ever so civilized imperial powers through a combination of bloody excess and sinister blankness. Some plates have clear-cut villains—e.g., Not [in This Case] Either (1810), in which a Napoleonic commander smirks at a hanged Spaniard. But more often the killers are faceless: out of frame, visually obstructed, masked in shadow, or absent altogether. Because we can’t really see the French soldiers in And There Is No Help, we have no way of knowing what they’re feeling, and in a sense it doesn’t matter. Their acts seem at once impassioned and impersonal.How will civilization end? Hatred or indifference? Fire or ice? Monsters or robots? The answer, per “Disasters,” seems to be some of both. After the 1810s, however, Goya doesn’t really do faceless horror—abandons it so utterly, in fact, that he seems to be trying to forget he ever gave it form. The show ends with his black crayon sketches of drunks and cackling lunatics, images that, it’s been suggested, betray an element of morbid fascination, though maybe there’s some nostalgia too. I’d take a drunk over a soldier any day.
ArtNews℗The Measure of All Things℗Leah Ollman℗ArtinAmerica℗23/02/2021℗℗For the decade that Brie Ruais has been pressing and prodding clay into sculptural works, each the equivalent of her body weight, her art has asserted an implicit material connection to the earth. Recently, the Brooklyn-based artist has made that connection to land explicit. In a series from 2018–19, Ruais mapped her garden, Borges-style, her clay record of the area at one-to-one scale with the terrain represented. Ruais spread her earthen matter of choice over paving and other earthen matter, imprinting the clay with the pressure of her hands and feet as well as plant material from the site. As has been her method, she then cut the irregularly shaped slab into sections, applied glaze selectively, fired the tiles, and regrouped them on the wall. Ruais’s work has long chronicled the process of its own making; now it also chronicles place.The pieces shown at Night Gallery—sculptures, photographs, and an installation (all 2020)—derive from road trips to the Western states. Reviewing a Ruais show in Los Angeles in 2014, I wrote that she made “earthworks on the scale of the individual body.” Her own weight continues to serve as a metric, while her own knuckles, knees, fingers, and toes remain her tools for shaping spirals, C-curves, and centrifugal patterns. But now the scale and scope of the work have expanded with Ruais’s adoption of the Great Basin in Nevada as both source and setting. The shift aligns her ever closer with site-specific, process-oriented, performative precedents of the ’60s and ’70s by artists as diverse as Michelle Stuart, Judy Chicago, Ana Mendieta, and Richard Long.Four color photographs in the show, shot with a drone-mounted camera, offered aerial views of unfired sculptures Ruais made and left in situ. These ephemeral interventions, primal marks of presence acted upon by weather and time, call attention to geological phenomena as well as to functional purposes assigned to the land. The pictures’ elevated perspective flattens the scenes and reduces Ruais’s rugged gestures to pictographs, resonant with other distilled features nearby, including the lines of animal and vehicular trails. Three Seasons Passed looks down upon a letter X in clay that has devolved into a pale rust tattoo on the desert’s bleached, parched skin. Another image depicts crosshairs that Ruais has drawn in clay in a clearing. Aerial surveillance is cast here as an instrument of dominance and threat, with the land itself as target.Several of the wall-mounted sculptures in the show incorporate rocks Ruais gathered from the desert, which added emphatic punctuation to the already dynamic swirls and bursts, glazed in painterly swipes of pewter, wine, jade, and milk. An installation constructed in the gallery, a long, low rock wall imposing a border between unfired stoneware starbursts on the ground, one white, one reddish-brown, introduced metaphors of social critique, in its form and title: The things we build, the things we let fall apart, the things we destroy.Ruais’s work has a palpable, here, now immediacy. Even so, it assumes a kind of conceptualizing distance, a meta-perch over the essentials of time, place, raw matter, motion, the body. Ultimately, what she sculpts are the pulsing energies and directional forces animating it all.
ArtNews℗What’s In a Face?℗Brian Ng℗ArtinAmerica℗18/02/2021℗℗In the mid-2000s, Kevin Francis Gray began sculpting cloaked or hooded figures in marble and bronze, their faces hidden by draped cloth. More recent works have featured faces distorted by pockmarks, the marble resembling a dimpled pillow. In Gray’s latest series, “Breakdown Works” (2020), which make up the bulk of his exhibition at Pace, the faces are even more obscured: he has gouged so deeply into the marble that it is unclear, in many instances, if you’re even looking at a head.It is a flat-out challenge to find a face in Breakdown Work #6, though its form—an oblong piece of Carrara marble mounted on a bronze pole—implies one. A hefty single hole is punched out of the marble, slightly off-center, while a golden hoop earring pierces the lower-left corner. On the right is a wormlike growth, with three trough-like indentations. This protrusion, which looks more stuck on than carved out, could be a nose, or an ear—even though the earring is on the opposite side of the “face.” Breakdown Work #7, carved from deep dirty-green marble that gradates to memory-foam yellow, and set atop a vertical steel beam, recalls the heads of the Moai monoliths on Easter Island, but with holes and scooped-out hollows. As I walked around it, the sculpture’s facial expression seemed to shift from sternness to snarling disappointment to surprise.The “Breakdown Works” are erected on plinths made of materials including concrete, salvaged wood, and corten steel; the tallest works stand more than seven feet, so the heads loom over the viewer, staring down from above. Many of the sculptures seem weathered by age, in both attitude and form. Breakdown Work #21 looks as if the Classical bust of a wizened elder had been left outside, his identifying features scoured off with time as the small crevices in the stone turned to caverns, and sharp edges to gentle curves. In fact, the marble Gray employs has often been sitting out in the elements—some of the original blocks were found abandoned in a marble yard, covered with ivy—but the heads themselves also seem tired, peering down from on high at the foibles of the viewers below. The show also includes a pair of sculptures from Gray’s “Young Gods” series (2019–ongoing), comprising freestanding male figures in marble. In contrast to the stiff bearing of the “Breakdown Works,” these pieces have a sense of motion about them—in their stance, but also their surfaces, which are rippled like the waves of an angry sea. The left foot of Striding Youth pushes off its base as daintily as a dressage horse; Sun Worshipper Standing is stationary, but seemingly not for long when viewed from the back, one of his buttocks is markedly raised. The two “Young Gods” seem impatient with the “Breakdown Works” surrounding them, the “Breakdown Works” irritated by the “Young Gods” wanting to get going. This article appears under the title “Kevin Francis Gray” in the March/April 2021 issue, p. 76.
ArtNews℗The View from Without℗Louis Bury℗ArtinAmerica℗16/02/2021℗℗There was nothing sleepy about “Grunch in Bed,” Jamaal Peterman’s vigorous Manhattan solo debut. Its eight ample canvases (all 2020) tingle with bright, contrasting colors and textures. Each uses oil paint, as well as patches of vinyl glitter and painted sand, to depict urban and exurban environs composed of interconnected and embedded geometric shapes. Most of the pictures also contain a lone, hoodie-clad human figure—rendered in larger scale and more realistic style—whose activities range from running to lounging to vaulting a wall. “Deep set” trompe l’oeil picture frames are painted in variegated hues around the canvases’ borders, creating the illusion that these scenes play out at a slightly recessed distance.The exhibition’s title alluded to Buckminster Fuller’s 1983 book, Grunch of Giants, an account of the postwar growth of giant corporations leading to their Gross Universal Cash Heist (GRUNCH). Peterman’s landscapes evoke narratives about Black life in the United States through the human figures’ poses and, in a couple works, the crude iconography—which references events from the Middle Passage to redlining to Black Lives Matter protests—scrawled on sidewalks and brick walls. Yet what makes the paintings powerful is not just their narrative content but also their formal complexity. In particular, the contrast between the supple human figures and the flat, angular cityscapes suggests an oil-water separation between the two.While the shadowy human figures appear lifelike in comparison to the environment’s planar simplicity, the characters’ missing faces, absent hands, and translucency make them appear ghostlike in their own right. In 30 for 30, for example, we see a figure running mid-stride; his diaphanous legs treading lightly across a hard-edged network of buildings and pipes, even as his hoodie’s opacity renders his upper body conspicuous. Wade in the water also conveys a sense of apartness between the naturalistic figure, in repose on the foreground sidewalk, and the rectilinear blue vista upon which he gazes. Stylistically and spatially, figure and ground feel as though they represent two different realms—two different realities—akin to the effect produced when an animated image is superimposed on a photographic image or vice versa.The dire consequences of this mutual alienation are driven home in the paintings where the human figure’s body has either been harmed or faces the threat of harm. In You Know It’s Coming, the sky glows a fiery color as a stylish architectural compound hovers above the figure’s prostrate, apparently lifeless body. Broken Democracy juxtaposes the figure taking a knee, arms raised in a “don’t shoot” gesture, against an uncluttered suburban landscape whose blocky houses and Ellsworth Kelly color palette draw on the pleasing idiom of geometric abstraction. Yet the houses’ roofs, whose stretched starry shapes recall Batman “POW!” graphics, hint at the violence latent in the setting’s clean, seductive surfaces.At a time when depictions of black and brown bodies have become more prominent in painting, Peterman’s “Grunch” series, devoid of skin pigmentation, harkens back to Ralph Ellison’s classic midcentury parable, Invisible Man. Like the novel, the paintings explore the ways that invisibility and hyper-visibility can be products of perceptual and conceptual distortions rather than intrinsic qualities of their subjects. Peterman’s earlier James Fuentes Online exhibition, “Tales from the Hood,” addressed similar themes through an ingenious series of small acrylic paintings that translate police All-Points Bulletin (APB) descriptions of Black suspects—as in the title Black male Red shirt Red pants Locks gold teeth (2020)—into beguiling geometric abstractions. Both bodies of work evidence how Peterman has already, at the outset of his career, developed a complex, deceptively exuberant vocabulary for depicting someof this country’s darker realities. This article appears under the title “Jamaal Peterman” in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 70—71.
ArtNews℗Give Peace a Chance℗Osman Can Yerebakan℗ArtinAmerica℗12/02/2021℗℗In the 2000 comedy Miss Congeniality, Sandra Bullock’s Grace, an undercover FBI agent posing as a pageant contestant, is asked to define the “most important thing our society needs.” Her initial response—harsher punishment for parole violations—is poorly received. “And world peace,” she adds, a crowdpleaser that fulfills the audience and jury’s expectations of generic sentiment.Opening at the tail end of a year defined by doubt and unrest, the group exhibition “World Peace” at MoCA Westport in Connecticut—co-curated by Ruth Mannes, Liz Leggett, and Todd von Ammon—took on this widely coveted, yet almost meaninglessly abstract concept. Despite the internationalism implied by the titular phrase, the show’s intergenerational roster primarily featured artists based in the US, with the works on view foregrounding an American outlook on political strife and human struggle.Greeting viewers at the exhibition’s entrance was Tabor Robak’s MiniJumbo (2019), a scaled-down version of a stadium jumbotron screen. In place of sports game highlights, slogans like “New Addictive Substance” and “Work Harder” slide and pop across the screens in flashy fonts, the texts algorithmically generated by a neural network trained on contemporary advertising. This critique of capitalist rhetoric was accompanied by an array of works addressing militarism and war. Corita Kent’s screen-printed collage News of the Week (1969) presents a Pop-inflected take on the mass media representation of the Vietnam War, reproducing two covers from the same week’s issues of Newsweek and Time magazines in a glaring palette of red and green. Similarly employing appropriated imagery, Julia Wachtel’s painting Target (2017) juxtaposes a silkscreen print of an armed member of a Texan militia, patrolling the border in a menacing mask, with a painting of a cartoonish a balding middle-age man contemplating a toupee and girdle, drawn from a vintage greeting card. Robert Beck’s unexpectedly seductive Wound Filler (Shot #6), 2000, takes the form of a mysterious orifice, created by shooting a hole into a mass of wound filler, commonly used by morticians.The exhibition’s larger second gallery was dominated by another text-based work, this one calling for action. A massive banner by the New Haven-based activist graphic design collective Class Action Collective, Vote for Science (2018) was suspended from the ceiling, dramatically spilling across the floor. The repurposed banner, reading HOPE FOR THE BEST, VOTE FOR SCIENCE in bold red and blue lettering, is one of many that the group installed on highway billboards across Connecticut, Florida, and Indiana during the 2018 midterm elections, in collaboration with the Union of Concerned Scientists. Some of the surrounding works conveyed humanity’s abominations, among them Cady Noland’s Untitled (Charles Manson), 1994, a collage of Xeroxed newspapers showing the notorious serial killer handcuffed during his trial. Others hinted at the cyclical nature of violence and injustice: the exhibition’s oldest work, a simple line drawing of a lynching on found cardboard by Bill Traylor—one of over 1,500 drawings the self-taught, Alabama-based artist made between 1939 and 1942—hung steps away from a documentary photograph by Spencer Platt depicting the arrest of a protestor in Portland during last summer’s Black Lives Matter uprisings (Female Protestor, 2020).When I visited the show, Mannes told me that the title was inspired by a 1996 video installation by Bruce Nauman, in which five figures—one per screen—talk over one another, exchanging pleasantries (“I’ll talk, you listen” and vice versa) that ultimately turn aggressive (“If you say it once more, I’ll kill you.”). The exhibition reflected a similar skepticism about the idea of “world peace,” with the works on view highlighting atrocities, inequalities, and social fractures that can’t be simply wished away.
ArtNews℗Consistently Cool℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗11/02/2021℗℗Emily Mason passed away in 2019 at the age of 87. She left behind two daughters, four grandchildren, innumerable adoring friends, and one of the most sustainedly dazzling bodies of work in postwar American painting. Despite this legacy (or should that be “because of?”), she was never a superstar. While Pop, Minimalism, and various strains of Post- and Neo- got the most column inches, she stuck to lyrical abstraction. She experimented, but never too flashily—once she discovered oil on primed canvas, she was set for life—and she despised gimmicks in decades when gimmickry dominated. Mason moved into a Chelsea studio in 1979 and spent the better part of the next forty years inside, painting with majestic indifference.Comprising twenty-two paintings made between the late 1970s and the mid-1990s, the exhibition “Emily Mason: Chelsea Paintings,” at Miles McEnery, is a shrine to that indifference: the quiet confidence it demands, the glory it can bring. Confidence is the easier of these two to grasp. Mason was by all accounts a modest person, comfortable in her own skin, and one suspects this had a lot to do with her upbringing. Her mother was the abstract painter Alice Trumbull Mason; her babysitter was Elaine de Kooning; Franz Kline, Lee Krasner, John Cage, and Helen Frankenthaler were dinner guests. She was too familiar with the New York School milieu to crave admission or worry about expulsion, and if she ever came down with a case of the anxiety of influence it was asymptomatic.When writing about Mason, it’s tempting to list colors like a kid burbling over a new box of Crayolas and leave it at that. And yes, fine: there are satiny blues, citric oranges, and lapidary purples. The upper half of I Heard the Corn (1979) is dominated by saturated yellow, while the lower half is strewn with faded terra-cotta and cactus green—the Southwest in twenty square feet, brought to you by a lifelong Manhattanite. In Dormant Nature (1984–85) is a cooler, softer-edged work, with violet and aquamarine dissolving into twilit blue to create an illusion of vast depth. Even here, though, you’re struck by the clarity of Mason’s free association. She paints like Bach improvising a three-voice fugue: every color in crisp focus, precisely accounted for even where it doesn’t dominate.This plainspoken lucidity makes Mason’s compositions seem not just beautiful but correct—and, by the same token, different from the more roughly improvisational painting for which the New York School became famous. I can begin to wrap my head around the elegant complementary blues and oranges of Ancient Incense (1981). It’s much harder to understand why a messier canvas like Hell’s Kitchen (1994), a hefty slab of green garnished with spicy reds and yellows, feels so right: it has the inevitability of a formula, though of course there is no formula for such an image, no road map around the color wheel.Mason’s powers abandon her in My Iris (1984–85). The ingredients are familiar enough (tart yellow and cool blue pressed tight together, with some secondary shades in between) but the composition is too pat in places and too muddled in others, the colors neither flowing nor clashing enough to strike sparks. The weakest work in the exhibition, it reminds us that inevitability is a painterly effect like any other—there’s nothing inevitable about it, nor about Mason’s ability to achieve it so consistently. That she did probably deserves the word “miracle,” but allow me to put it differently: as long as this show is up, Chelsea will be the coolest neighborhood in New York.
ArtNews℗Portraits of Place℗Christopher Green℗ArtinAmerica℗10/02/2021℗℗Early in Sky Hopinka’s new three-channel video installation Here you are before the trees (2020), the artist-filmmaker holds a small freshwater shell up to the camera, just gathered from the shore of Lake Michigan. His grandmother, Dolli Big John, tells him that her own grandfather had said a Ho-Chunk isn’t a Ho-Chunk without a shell from Red Banks, Wisconsin, a site central to the Nation’s creation story. It’s a quiet moment, easy to miss among dramatic shots of stormy skies, highway signs, and picturesque forests, rivers, and lakes. Commissioned by the Bard College Center for Curatorial Studies for “Sky Hopinka: Centers of Somewhere,” the artist’s first museum survey, the video is ostensibly about the Hudson Valley territory where the college is located. But, like much of Hopinka’s work—represented in the exhibition by videos, calligrams based on Indigenous pictographs, and a new series of etched photographs—it is a multilayered portrait of place informed by both personal and historical understandings of the landscape.Best known as an experimental filmmaker, Hopinka entangles the patterns of language and cinema in his work. His short films and videos, often subtitled in English, Hočąk (the Ho-Chunk language), and Chinuk Wawa, a Creole language of the Pacific Northwest, commingle word and image in ways that subvert linguistic systems and ideas about cultural identity. In Jáaji Approx. (2015), for example, Hopinka layers audio of an interview with his father about his experiences on the powwow circuit over footage shot from a car dashboard as he traverses the country by highways and bridges. At times, he manipulates the footage, combining multiple views or inverting the landscape. The audio is subtitled in what appears to be a foreign or Indigenous language, but is in fact his father’s English words spelled in the international phonetic alphabet. “Jáaji” is an approximate translation of the direct address for “father” in Hočąk; the filmic wanderings and estranged linguistic markings indicate Hopinka’s familial relations with sites and songs.Hopinka’s father was a drummer and singer, and his mother a dancer, and their rhythms pervade his work. In Jáaji Approx., recorded Hočąk songs sync with the sound and blinking light of a car turn signal. In other films, his scores align with the repeated thrum of passing highway signs or flashes of fireworks and lightning. I’ll Remember You as You Were, not as What You’ll Become (2016) is an elegy for the late Anishinaabe and Chemehuevi poet Diane Burns, a fixture of the Lower East Side and Native American poetry communities from the 1980s until her death in 2006, who appears in archival footage of a poetry reading, tapping a beat on a microphone as she speaks. Interspersed throughout the video are excerpts of ethnographic texts describing Ho-Chunk concepts of death and rebirth; other segments show the circular movements of powwow dancers filtered through aurora-like shimmering curtains of light that take shape to the chorus of a Christian hymn. The 2017 video Dislocation Blues, which Hopinka describes as “an incomplete and imperfect portrait of reflections from Standing Rock,” alternates between the personal accounts of two water protectors, participants in the anti-Dakota Access Pipeline protests, and scenes shot from both the frontlines and its background. Despite the seemingly detached nature of the interview format, the artist positions himself and his subjects as embedded participants, neither objective in their memories nor capable of capturing the event in its totality.These three videos precede Here you are before the trees in the exhibition, and provide different lenses—political, personal, and elegiac—through which to view the new installation. The work centers on the conjoined histories of the Ho-Chunk and the Stockbridge-Munsee Band of Mohicans, the latter of whom were forcibly relocated in the nineteenth century from the Hudson Valley to an area of Wisconsin adjacent to Ho-Chunk homelands. Hopinka’s own career has retraced these colonial movements: he now teaches at Bard, on Mohican territory. This history is further refracted through footage arranged on three screens. The beginning of the video identifies the subject of each channel: the Mahicannituck (the Mohican name for the Hudson River); the road (a Wisconsin highway); and the Waaziija (the Ho-Chunk Nation’s territory on the shores of Lake Michigan). Periodically, these views—of dappled Hudson forests, the lakeshore, and passing headlights—shift between the screens, layering territories within one another. As the views interchange, an 1854 text by Mohican diplomat John Wannuaucon Quinney decrying the injustices against his people scrolls across the three channels.In Here you are before the trees, Hopinka’s own movements serve as the connector between site, history, and personal experience. They also point to the work’s central theses: that place can be described through a multitude of Indigenous centers, and that one can be centered in many different ways. Hopinka incorporates audio recordings of a lecture by Lakota legal scholar Vine Deloria Jr. and of a phone call with Ho-Chunk anthropologist Renya Ramirez, the latter of whom describes her concept of “native hubs,” a way of understanding Indigenous belonging when distant from a land-based center. Hopinka’s work is anchored in this notion, and his videos similarly challenge an essentialist view of Indigenous identity, namely accusations of inauthenticity that have historically been directed at those who have been forcibly removed or are personally distant from their ancestral territories.Hopinka has previously identified his work as “ethnopoetic,” partly in an effort to redirect the long baggage train of ethnographic film. Recently, he stopped using the term, seeking to move past the reactive nature of the “ethno-” prefix altogether. Instead of representing the land, he is more interested in helping it describe itself. The exhibition featured sixteen photographs from the series “Breathings” (2020), wandering images of oceans, clouds, barges, and airplane wings, taken on Hopinka’s travels throughout the US in early 2020. The photographs are hand-etched with text that encircles the borders of each image, written in spare moments on the road, while waiting in a car or terminal.A new book of Hopinka’s poetry, titled Perfidia, co-published by CCS Bard and the independent press Wendy’s Subway, was released in conjunction with the show. Comprising a long series of searching cantos interspersed with photographs from his journeys across the continent, the book links Hopinka’s commitment to letting many landscapes and centers speak visually with his own first-person ruminations, which delve into colonial wrongs, dispossession, land, and love.Perfidia is titled after a line from an 1838 letter written by Ralph Waldo Emerson to President Martin van Buren in protest of the ongoing removal of the Cherokee from their homelands, calling the action that would come to be known as the Trail of Tears an “instrument of perfidy.” Treaties with the Mohicans and Munsee Lenape, once recorded indelibly in shell-bead wampum belts, were likewise treated perfidiously by the colonial forces that uprooted their communities. Hopinka handles these histories exquisitely, gingerly, and personally, like shells in the hand. This article appears under the title “Sky Hopinka” in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 71—73.
ArtNews℗Magnificent Monstrosity℗Emily Watlington℗ArtinAmerica℗09/02/2021℗℗In the 1940s, artist Riva Lehrer’s mother worked as a medical researcher in the then nascent field of teratology. From the Greek teratos, or “monster,” teratology is the study of birth defects. So in 1958, when Riva was born with spina bifida, which means “split spine,” her mother knew better than to accept the medical mainstream’s casual neglect. At the time, doctors didn’t operate on babies with the condition, and 90 percent of them died before the age of two. Indeed, as the term “teratology” suggests, they saw these babies as monsters. Riva’s mother insisted her daughter receive the medical interventions she needed to survive because she shared the radical views of her former boss—Austrian physician Josef Warkany—who believed disabled babies could grow up to live meaningful lives.Lehrer proudly and playfully identifies with monstrosity. That’s why she gave her memoir the title Golem Girl. The book details her childhood memories of school, family, and friends, punctuated with stories of the numerous summer breaks that she spent recovering from serious surgery. The portrait painter sees herself in Jewish folklore’s humanoid lump of clay because, like the golem, her body “was built by human hands.”Today, Lehrer is a professor at both Northwestern University and the Art Institute of Chicago, where she teaches figure drawing. At Northwestern—where she instructs not art but med students—Lehrer created a course called “Drawing in a Jar.” She came up with several assignments after seeing preserved spina bifida fetuses (“my ancestors,” she calls them) at the Mütter Museum in Philadelphia. In the class, she encourages future doctors to refer to their bottled subjects as “individuals,” rather than “specimens.” Then, she asks them to research the life of someone with the same condition.In her artwork, in her courses, and in her memoir, Lehrer focuses on disabled peoples’ rich range of experience. While medicine fixates on the body’s imperfections, Lehrer teaches her students and her audience that disability is not simply biological: it’s socially defined, too. And she manages to make this point with tact, grace, and humor: after all, disabled people are often experts at mitigating the discomfort their presence sometimes causes. In one moving chapter, she recalls a rare moment in which an adult showed optimism for her future. Lehrer attended the Randall J. Condon School for disabled children in Cincinnati, which was a radical institution for its time. Across the country, most disabled students learned basic literacy and industrial skills, and were not guaranteed a high school education. But at Condon, they were taught academics, which is not to say the school adequately prepared them for the real world: as Lehrer puts it, Condon “would rather have offered ROTC training than sex education.” And in Home Economics, students learned survival skills—how to heat up Campbell’s soup—rather than how “to become wives and mothers,” as most girls did in the 1960s. One day, though, the Home Ec teacher surprised her class: they were going to learn to make an elaborate dessert, baked Alaska! Not knowing the dish had gone out of fashion a decade before she was born, Lehrer was “stupefied”: an adult imagined that she and her peers might grow up to one day host fancy soirees. It was a formative moment.Today, Lehrer creates portraits of disabled people—hosting parties, falling in love, making art—chronicling the ingenuity and interdependence that impairment engenders. Her self-portraits have appeared on the covers of notable books like Lauren Berlant’s widely read Cruel Optimism (2011) and Tobin Siebers’s Disability Theory (2008). In 1997 Lehrer began a series of portraits depicting disabled people in the arts and academia. Titled “Circle Stories,” the series comprises portraits that are realistically rendered, yet incorporate symbols that help tell the stories of their subjects.Throughout, Lehrer shows how Western medicine and concepts of beauty are sometimes one and the same. Some of the “cures” doctors prescribed were not meant to relieve pain, but to help her conform her body to a narrow norm. She had gall bladder surgery because she would have died without it. But she wonders whether surgeries meant to “correct” her gait were simply attempts to make her look less monsterlike in the eyes of the nondisabled. How different, Lehrer wonders provocatively, were these sorts of treatments from the one elective surgery she volunteered to undergo, what she calls “the great milestone of Jewish womanhood”—her nose job.
ArtNews℗Night Terrors℗David Everitt Howe℗ArtinAmerica℗05/02/2021℗℗In their exhibition “Bijeg u noć,” at Martos, the Croatian-born, New York–based duo TARWUK (Bruno Pogačnik Tremow and Ivana Vukšić) presented a dystopian sci-fi vision featuring crumbling bionic forms, black, pitched mountains, and ominous specters. Comprising paintings, sculptures, and drawings, the show drew on the artists’ childhood memories of the devastating Croatian War of 1991–95, in which the country fought for independence from Yugoslavia. While nothing in “Bijeg u noć” directly referred to this historical era, its trauma manifested in terrifying, oblique form, sublimated in dark fantasies that borrow equally from Huma Bhabha’s war-torn grotesques, the night-cloaked bleakness of Francisco Goya’s black paintings, and H.R. Giger’s phallic, machine-like monster from the movie Alien (1979).The exhibition’s title is Croatian for “Escape into the night,” but the individual works are all titled in the artists’ invented language, as if tacitly acknowledging that words alone are ill-equipped to articulate the horrors they witnessed as children. Two humpbacked figures carefully traverse a glowing mountain passage in the painting MRTISKLAAAH_OnaruONRC.98 (2019), their backs fragmented into rivulets of black and white pigment. Intricately patterned brushwork likewise composes the cliffsides, creating a tension between abstraction and figuration. Four square clay panels black as soot are appended to the work’s four sides. Depicting curling leaves and branches, the panels give the work a cruciform shape, nodding to the macabre dimension of much Christian allegory and tradition, which can instill a supplicating fear.Other works similarly allude to the terrifying aspects of Christianity. The lower panel of MRTISKLAAAH_LENT.666.W (2019–20) spells out the word lent in bold red letters, crowned by an abstract landscape of tossing and turning blacks and browns, suggesting forms crumpled into a ball and wrung through water, colors running left, right, and down. Some paintings depict hazy ghosts: a smokelike apparition of wispy white materializes out of thin air in MRTISKLAAAH_evsovtrm.Da.811 (2020), while another specter in MRTISKLAAAH_VIDoLeNx_H.44 (2017–20) unfolds massive wings like the Jabberwock rearing its head.In the exhibition’s sculptural works, bodily forms are assembled and disassembled in Frankensteinian ways. KLOSKLAS_5T1ll43r3 (2020) is a standing female figure punctured by a mechanical apparatus that supports her detached head, raising it high like a freakish beacon, its eyeless sockets full of putty. Another miniature nude juts from its groin, arms extended as if in prayer. In KLOSKLAS_divco/ZUBB32yeltenb (2020), the figure seems to be transforming into something entirely inorganic, its shriveled, desiccated flesh-and-blood body held up by machine parts attached to the back of its head and spine—the definition of malformed. These works are discomforting, but also quite beautiful, finely suturing together unexpected components: a string of pennies on the latter sculpture, for instance, or the circuit boards forming part of the former’s neck. Rebar helps buttress a downcast head atop a ceramic base in KLOSKLAS_ H45()numidor (2019); the checklist cites among the work’s materials “BQE [Brooklyn-Queens Expressway] relics” and steel, along with coyote hide, human teeth, and “mummified spider nest.” (Quite a list!) Given such eclectic materials and the head-spinning range of art-historical references and cues, TARWUK’s work can seem overwhelming or excessive. The most impressive aspect of “Bijeg u noć,” nevertheless, was how the artists assembled these disparate elements into a cohesive cosmology. This article appears under the title “Eda Sütunç” in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 60—70.
ArtNews℗Appropriation and Antagonism℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗02/02/2021℗℗What subjects are appropriate for which artists—and what is simply appropriation? For Hamishi Farah, portraiture rushes to the heart of the question. His exhibition “Antagoni,” at Château Shatto, includes five works (all 2020) made by the hand of Rachel Dolezal. In 2015, it emerged that Dolezal, whose parents are both white, had passed as Black for years, during which she earned an MFA from Howard University and briefly headed a chapter of the NAACP. Raked over in public opinion and shunned by activists, Dolezal has apparently retreated into art to express her trans-racial sense of self. In Black & White Cookie, she presents herself in a head wrap, holding a black-and-white cookie bitten at the midline. The painting is uncontrite; so are Banished, a standing self-portrait in charcoal, in which she appears with a hole drawn in her belly the same size and shape as the dense black sun pictured overhead, and Drowning, a self-portrait of the artist encircled by sharks. Farah had the gallery commission these pictures, and then—without Dolezal’s permission—countersigned each one, claiming them as readymades. In mid-December, Dolezal’s lawyer demanded that Farah’s signature be removed. The reasoning, however, reveals a pedestrian view of authorship: Dolezal wanted to ensure that potential buyers knew whom to contact for fresh commissions.Another suite of six portraits, painted by Farah based on images pulled from the web, is just as fraught. Joey and Matthew portray figures in hapless blackface: mug shots of a pair of white burglars who drunkenly obscured their faces with Sharpie. After Vidaperfect, Gogograham & Marykang employs a backstage shot from the designer Gogo Graham’s FW20 runway show; it depicts a model masked by a taupe stocking, as if ready to burgle. These photos have their own ethics, but in appropriating or reproducing the image—as the photograph breaks into brushstrokes—the burden of representing iffy subjects shifts onto the painter. At the same time, Farah’s fidelity to his sources retains the idiosyncratic or idiotic ways each subject thwarts the black/white binary. Weirdest and saddest is Argyria Blue (The Ghost of Paul Karason), depicting a man whose ingestion of homemade colloidal silver turned his skin a weary navy, through the same chemical reaction underlying silver-based (indeed, black-and-white) photography. Karason spent a chunk of his final years homeless, shunned for the color of his skin. Each painting muddles ideas of facial recognition, race, and the Other; in contrast to the two-toned obsession behind Dolezal’s self-portraits, all but one of which are grayscale, Farah’s six emphasize the full visible spectrum.Even so, Farah’s show also mocked the facile rainbow liberalism that doesn’t care if you’re Black or white, blue or green. Untitled (Bee), sandwiched between Argyria and After Vidaperfect, is based on a photo that accompanied a Daily Mail article detailing how a wasp’s facial markings advertise its fighting prowess. Only racist pseudoscientists claim to predict aggressiveness, intelligence, or virility in the human species based on physiognomy. But Farah’s appropriation of Dolezal, her artwork and messy ethics both, neither absolves nor condemns her. Instead, “Antagoni”—a show with a title ambivalently shy of antagonism—envelops artist, subject, and viewer in a cascade of sticky interpreting and representing.Farah has been here before. His painting Representation of Arlo (2018) pushed the controversy over the inclusion of Dana Schutz’s expressionist riff on the murdered Emmett Till in the 2017 Whitney Biennial in discomfiting, productive directions. Schutz maintained that her painting spoke to the sincere, universal empathy of motherhood; Farah duly based his on a photograph of Schutz’s son. Alas, critics took Farah’s gauzy, almost saccharine portrait of a white artist’s white son as an aggressive, even violent act. In other words, they reprised Schutz and her defenders’ failure to give painting its due alongside photography as a technology of race. “Antagoni” tests the same humanist tenet that my freedom ends where it restricts yours. Here, it holds. In “Antagoni,” there is another picture of a mother and child: Motherhood, by Rachel Dolezal. This article appears under the title “Hamishi Farah” in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 74—75.
ArtNews℗Patterns of Identity℗Kaya Genç℗ArtinAmerica℗28/01/2021℗℗Baklava is the name for both a traditional Turkish dessert pastry and the diamond pattern often used in rugs woven in Anatolia. Comprising layers of phyllo dough laden with chopped nuts and soaked in a honey syrup, the sweet, addictive, diamond-shaped delicacy is a favorite among tourists in Turkey, and so is the baklava-patterned Turkish rug, or kilim. Since arriving in the region in the eleventh century, Turks have woven carpets using geometric and stylized natural patterns; common among them are tulips, hyacinths, twisting branches, birds, gazelles, and diamonds. The oldest surviving rugs date from the thirteenth century. Eda Sütunç, a performance artist with an MFA from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and a PhD in communications from Kadir Has University in Istanbul, has recently explored baklava’s double role in food and weaving.In 2018, Sütunç presented Weightless Burden, a nine-hour performance for the whole of which she lay on the floor with a suitcase on her back, indoors at Istanbul’s KüçükÇiftlik Park. The valise contained an electronic tablet screening a looped video of falling rocks. This endurance piece evoked the unrecognized burdens of female emotional labor, leading the artist to identify with traditional rug weavers, all of whom are women. Around the same time, Sütunç happened to read “The Future Looms,” Sadie Plant’s 1995 essay on looms and cybernetics. The British theorist’s account of looms as a catalyst for the invention of computers spurred Sütunç to examine weaving’s potential for liberating female agency in the digital age. Her investigation has involved videos, sculptures, and machine learning, all represented in her solo show at Sanatorium.For Baklava (2017–20), Sütunç placed 126 pastries in individual resin boxes, and assembled them with metal rings in a grid. Mounted on four suspended rods, the structure resembles a draped kilim. When the motorized rods are activated, the sculpture undulates like a flying carpet. A trope used in folklore—and in literature, at least since the medieval collection One Thousand and One Nights—the magic carpet transports passengers to distant lands “in the twinkling of an eye.” Playing on the dialectic between freedom and confinement, Sütunç’s mechanized carpet simulates a wavy sailing-through-the-air movement, while also displaying the decomposition of the pastries in their boxes.Genderless Nipples (2020) features twenty-one light boxes placed on an aluminum rack in a pattern that melds two classic rug designs: “animal horn,” which represents power, and “hands on hips,” which symbolizes female fertility. The light boxes themselves each re-create the “burdock” motif: a plant symbolizing abundance and offering defense against the evil eye. Duratrans prints set inside these light boxes offer nipple images captured by an artificial intelligence engine that Sütunç fed with data from porn sites. The gender of the people who exposed these twenty-one nipples remains unspecified, recalling the @genderless_nipples Instagram initiative, which posts anonymous “nipple donations” daily. The goal, in both cases, is to subvert the centuries-long bias of censoring (and so eroticizing) only female nipples.A similar suspicion of binaries pervades Artificial Tears (2020), a seven-minute video showing Sütunç’s struggle to cry “naturally.” In the first scene, she exposes her left eye to a hand-size plastic fan; next, she applies VapoRub beneath both eyes in front of a mirror; eventually, she finds that chopping onions does the trick. The Weeper (2020), a related sculptural installation, also probes the compulsion to produce what is expected of the female gender. Sütunç made a mold of her face using alginate plaster and resin casting, and set it at eye level on a metal stand. Attached to the life cast, a dual intravenous apparatus feeds water to the eyeholes. Just below, “teardrops” fall on a stainless steel tray. The tray and the infusion bottles produce a clinical mood, while Sütunç’s ersatz face sheds cold tears. The piece, like the exhibition as a whole, challenges viewers to distinguish between the natural and the artificial, the sentimental and the scientific, the material and the immaterial. This article appears under the title “Eda Sütunç” in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 76—77.
ArtNews℗Diversity East℗Eleanor Heartney℗ArtinAmerica℗26/01/2021℗℗Among the many New York casualties of Covid-19 was a plan for a citywide Asia Society Triennial set to open in June 2020. As envisioned by co-curators Michelle Yun and Boon Hui Tan, the Triennial—the organization’s first—was to be a multidisciplinary celebration of contemporary art from and about Asia. “We Do Not Dream Alone,” a truncated version comprising two exhibitions and a scattering of performance events, finally opened in October 2020, with a second part scheduled to run March 15–June 27.In his curatorial statement, Tan asserts that the Triennial is designed to unveil the way people, objects, and events “are linked in a complex web of ties, associations, and relationships,” thereby attesting to “the power of art to resist our urge to silo during these uncertain times.” That this admirable sentiment is vulnerable to oversimplification is evident at the outset of the event’s titular exhibition at Asia Society. A pair of matching sculptures by Xu Zhen® guard the show’s entrance. Each comprises a headless copy of a traditional Cambodian sculpture grafted—vertically, neck to neck—onto a headless copy of a classical Roman figure, thus announcing the curatorial premise that in a globalized context all cultures are hybrid. Further amplifying this idea, the treacly strains of the Disney anthem “It’s a Small World” waft through the second-floor galleries. The soundtrack’s source is an installation by Ken and Julia Yonetani. Not surprisingly, the Yonetanis employ this tune ironically as part of a critique of the twentieth century’s misplaced confidence in the benefits of nuclear energy. But the song inevitably colors all the surrounding works, enfolding them in a soporific plea for cultural harmony.Selections both reinforce and push back against this narrative. Natee Utarit’s painting The Dream of Siamese Monks (2020) provides a textbook illustration of hybridity. Based on a nineteenth-century Thai painting, it is a mishmash of images of colonial architecture, neoclassical sculpture, Western tourists, and a Buddhist monk pointing toward a giant lotus. More intriguing in its cross-cultural references is a special project by Xu Bing and Sun Xun, “We the People.” Guest-curated by Susan L. Beningson of the Brooklyn Museum, the installation suggests the interplay between Chinese and American political thinking. An official nineteenth-century print of the American Declaration of Independence anchors the project. Xu presents a silkworm-infested copy of The Analects of Confucius, an ancient text on familial duties and good government that influenced several Founding Fathers. Sun contributes a long scroll painting that mixes traditional Chinese characters and motifs with broken fragments of the Statue of Liberty. Handwritten denunciations of tyranny from the Declaration of Independence imply a damning judgment on the recent politics of China and the United States.At times the exhibition stretches the geographic definition of Asia almost to the breaking point, thus undermining the promise of common cultural inheritance. The Syrian-born artist Kevork Mourad emphasizes regional differences in Seeing Through Babel (2019), a model of the fabled Tower of Babel constructed from hand-drawn architectural cutouts. Minouk Lim’s Running on Empty, on the other hand, presents three totemic sculptures surrounding a video assembled from a 1983 broadcast documenting efforts to reunite Korean families torn apart by the Korean War. The faces of hopeful, despairing, and—in a few cases—joyfully reunited family members speak to the particularities of Korean history without having to belabor the work’s relevance to the current issue of family separation at the US-Mexico border.The second exhibition, “Dreaming Together,” at the New-York Historical Society, gives visitors a glimpse of what the originally envisioned civic extravaganza might have entailed. Culling works from the collections of Asia Society and the Historical Society (where she is curator of American art), Wendy N.E. Ikemoto has created interesting conversations across cultural and historical divides. The first of the show’s four thematic sections, Nature, includes such delights as a pair of meticulously realistic nineteenth-century still lifes by Martin Johnson Heade, set alongside Zhang Yirong’s exquisitely executed ink-on-silk Spring Peony III (2014). The People section pairs works like George Henry Boughton’s 1867 painting Pilgrims Going to Church and Stafford Mantle Northcote’s 1899 Hi Hee, Chinese Theatre, Pell St., New York City. While the former’s somber pilgrims reinforce the founding mythology of a white Protestant America, the latter’s depiction of a performance of Cantonese opera in Lower Manhattan suggests the nation’s more diverse reality. In City, visitors find such matchups as photographs by Zhang Dali showing the abrupt modernization of Beijing juxtaposed with shots of urban decay in Harlem by Marc Winnat. The Protest section includes poster images by Kalaya’an Mendoza and Kenn Lam advocating Asian/African American solidarity.But overhanging all these mini-stories was a larger narrative suggested by the inclusion of the Historical Society’s celebrated painting cycle “Course of Empire” (1833–36) by Thomas Cole. These five tableaux chronicle the rise and fall of a great civilization. Placed at the outset of the exhibition, they set an elegiac tone that is picked up by references in various works to the destruction of the World Trade Towers, the demolitions wrought by gentrification, and the destruction of political monuments. Matching Cole in epic ambition was Lotus, a 2014 video animation by Shiva Ahmadi that depicts the transformation of a peaceful Buddhist kingdom into a dystopia of war and destruction.The Asia Society Triennial suggests the evolution of pan-Asian exhibitions. After a hiatus during the market-driven years of the early twenty-first century, explorations of identity in art and art criticism are back in full force. But identity takes on a new complexion in a world shaken by financial crises, pandemic, right-wing nationalism, and, in the US, unapologetic racism. The 1990s discourse on the “Other” assumed a binary opposition between mainstream and margin, which served to implicitly elevate “non-Otherness” as the norm. By contrast, twenty-first-century identity emphasizes hybridity, intersectionality, and the leveling of hierarchies. But is this just another soothing myth?While “We Do Not Dream Alone” conveys a hopeful message about multiculturalism, “Dreaming Together” suggests that our commonalities are less about shared cultural traditions than about a collective potential for universal annihilation. In that sense, a “small, small world” is a terrifying prospect. This article appears under the title “Asia Society Triennial” in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 63—64.
ArtNews℗The Stuff of Life℗Danni Shen℗ArtinAmerica℗19/01/2021℗℗“Material Intimacies,” a group exhibition at NXTHVN in New Haven, Connecticut, reminds us that personal intimacy, even the sort highlighted by the ongoing pandemic, is expressed materially—and shaped by social and historical forces, not least the global colonialism that still affects ties to resources and kin. Curatorial fellows Michelle Phuong Ting and Claire Kim reveal, in an official statement about their selection of works by eight artists, that they kept a guiding question in mind: “What might liberatory intimacy look like, one that frees us from racist, capitalist, and misogynistic structures of communal life?” Each work in the show conveys a discrete presence and sometimes communicates with others, but without being subsumed by any chronological or thematic system.The voice of Mojave poet Natalie Diaz drifts from her film River Lines (2020), pervading the gallery space. Reading from her book Postcolonial Love Poem, Diaz places the ’Aha Haviily/Colorado River in kinship with her body: “The river is my sister—I am its daughter. It is my hands when I drink from it.” Yvette Mayorga’s bright, thickly layered acrylic paintings fuse consumerist iconography, rasquache (“leftover” or “underdog”) aesthetics, and federal emblems to make an optically striking critique of US xenophobia, while celebrating her Mexican-American heritage. Candice Lin’s crudely shaped and painted flasks satirize the orientalist fascination with luxury goods of refined porcelain. The white corked vessels, containing herbal tinctures and bearing stacked-letter inscriptions like CLAIRVOYANT TESTOSTERONE and HIERARCHICAL POTION OF POWER, effectively mock Western male claims of “natural” strength and privilege. Stephanie A. Lindquist’s botanical prints document cultivars such as sorghum (first grown in Africa) and rye (originally from Central Asia). Referencing Indigenous knowledge and, by virtue of her hands-on printing technique, implicitly disdaining dehumanized capitalist production methods, she celebrates our enriching everyday entanglements with nonhuman life-forms and things. In this holistic worldview—predating Western modernity, which splits nature and culture, subject and object—all matter has a soul. “I carry a river. It is who I am: /’Aha Makav. This is not a metaphor,” intones Diaz.Wesley Chavis’s Remnants of a Mythical Man (2016) is a swath of canvas imprinted with traces of the artist’s oiled body, then brushed with charcoal and repeatedly hand-washed. Depending on one’s vantage point, two small photographs are either revealed or shielded from view: one of them depicts Chavis dancing joyously; the other, showing Chavis’s grandmother holding his infant body, conveys the life-affirming spirit of ancestral touch. Familial ties are also emphasized in Natani Notah’s Sister, Sister (2018), comprising a shower stool, two skirts (one of them suspended by rope), and a mixing bowl of pinto beans and sunflower seeds. Alluding, through its “missing” bodies, to the ongoing colonial violence against Native American women, the work questions, Notah said in interview, “what it means to hold up, hold onto, and let go of each other simultaneously, across generations and subjectivities.”Hương Ngô’s Reap the Whirlwind (2018) comprises four serigraphs of Indochinese women, printed in virtually indecipherable fashion on high-gloss black paper, along with hand-bound books printed in thermochromic ink. Together, these elements evoke the concubine system involving Indochinese women and French men during the colonial period. Here, the historically exploited female figures acquire a kind of political agency by refusing the viewer’s immediate gaze, while the texts require one’s touch and body heat in order to become legible. The title echoes the Old Testament’s “they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind,” a warning confirmed by some thirty years of anticolonial war in Southeast Asia.Zina Saro-Wiwa’s video installation “Eaten by the Heart” (2012/13)—projected in a separate room outside the gallery—is a three-part documentary in which various people respond to questions about Black love in relation to choreography, cultural organization, and personal experience. Part III, Breathing Orchestra, presents a constantly changing grid of individuals who breathe deeply, with eyes closed, while their comments play in an audio collage. Finally, one male voice says distinctly, “Each of us are fractured, but we bring something beautiful to the table only if we look inside.” The speakers then fall silent, their pictures fading one by one into blackness and collective breathing, until only one man remains. He then calmly opens his eyes. This article appears under the title “Material Intimacies” in the March/April 2021 issue, pp. 73—74.
ArtNews℗Like Clockwork℗David Ebony℗ArtinAmerica℗14/01/2021℗℗Joseph Kosuth’s recent exhibition “‘Existential Time’” (all works 2020), his first US solo in five years, was originally scheduled to open at Sean Kelly in late March 2020, but was postponed until September due to the pandemic. Ironically, the delay added another level of meaning to the show, which combined images and objects with the ruminations of various noted writers on the nature of time.A pioneer of Conceptualism and installation art, Kosuth, who lives in New York and London, has explored the relationship between art and language for more than five decades. In this show, long lines of white neon lettering about seven inches high ran along one side of the room, illuminating the eerily darkened main gallery space, whose walls were painted slate gray. Each of the eight neon texts, positioned at a different height between floor and ceiling, was a quote from one of eight well-known literary figures identified by initials: Walter Benjamin, Roland Barthes, Roberto Bolaño, Jane Austen, Gustave Flaubert, Virginia Woolf, Shirley Jackson, and Antonio Porchia.Existential Time #14 reads, “I am the seasons, I think sometimes January, May, November, the mud, the midst, the dawn”—a snippet from the 1931 novel The Waves by Virginia Woolf. Accompanying each neon quote was a round industrial wall clock about sixteen inches in diameter. In a rather wry gesture, Kosuth set the motorized clock hands in these works spinning round the clockface at an accelerated pace, as if to speed up time, or at least to evoke the common sensation of its aggressive and relentless advance. Countering that nod to the relativity of time, twenty identical clocks, hung in an evenly spaced row high on the opposite wall, all told the current time of day. This series offers quotes from some of the same writers, plus William Shakespeare, Herman Melville, Paul Valéry, August Wilson, Toni Morrison, and others, in black vinyl press type applied to the convex glass covering each clock. One of the standouts for me, Quoted Clocks #28, features an observation by Søren Kierkegaard: “Language has time as its element; all other media have space as their element.” This subtle pronouncement could be read as either an ominous warning or an inspiring mantra for speakers and writers.Hung on the back wall and serving as the exhibition’s denouement were two large sepia photo pieces, paired with text panels silkscreened on laminated glass and backlit with white neon. Illumination (Existential Time) #3 comprises a vertical diptych showing two giraffes and a polar bear, all (it’s hard to tell) either live in captivity or taxidermied in a diorama, along with a remark by Friedrich Nietzsche: “This has given me the greatest trouble and still does: to realize that what things are called is incomparably more important than what they are.” It sounds almost like a summa of Kosuth’s career.The forlorn image in the other work, Illumination (Existential Time) #2, shows a lone owl standing on a deserted country road at night, seemingly illuminated by car headlights. The picture, referencing Hegel’s owl of Minerva, is matched with a text panel that quotes poet Antonio Porchia: “A thing, until it is everything, is noise, and once it is everything it is silence.” The element of time embedded in the line, evokes a sense of evolving, of becoming, with time arrested just for a silent moment, like the owl frozen in headlights. With their exhilarating tension between image and text, these new works make their own temporal demand on the viewer—to stop and find connections. In the end, Kosuth’s musings on “existential time” wind up being philosophical, yes, but also engagingly lyrical and personal. This article appears under the title “Joseph Kosuth” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 68—69.
ArtNews℗Blockbuster Bloat℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗12/01/2021℗℗What is a Cindy Sherman photograph? For starters, not quite a photograph—or so it’s been said. Critics favor this kind of brow-furrowing negative when writing about Sherman’s art: it’s not quite photography, not quite self-portraiture, not quite mimesis. At the same time, her work is constantly being compared to what it literally isn’t. Arthur Danto thought Sherman created “performances”; others have suggested that she creates something like cinema. Of Sherman’s most recent show, at Metro Pictures, the New Yorker’s Andrea K. Scott offered this blurbable brava: “as psychologically intense and disarmingly beautiful as any two-hour film.” Writing for the same magazine on the occasion of Sherman’s 2012 retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art, Peter Schjeldahl gushed that “we are thrown back into discontinuous feelings that she quickens and manipulates as deftly as a Hitchcock or a Kubrick.”One does not lightly invoke Hitchcock and Kubrick in the same sentence. But that’s another thing about Sherman: her work attracts hyperbole the way a magnet, no matter how tiny, attracts iron filings. The ten works at Metro Pictures, all from 2019, had the hallmarks of Sherman’s late style: Thomas Kinkade palette; green-screen backgrounds; massive scale; and an inescapable sense of micromanaged construction. In the eye of the hurricane is Sherman herself, wrapped in Stella McCartney and appearing in a range of guises, from twenty-five-year-old fuckboy to seventy-five-year-old grande dame. (If there’s a constant here, it’s the fat stacks implied by these houndstooth capes and cashmere coats).Sherman is a talented performer dulled by decades of A-list indulgence. Untitled Film Stills (1977–80) is still her best work: the funniest, the most cannily open-ended, the only one that truly wouldn’t have worked with anyone else at the center (compare it, if you dare, with James Franco’s 2013 rip-off—er—refashioning). Its famous, discussed-to-death concept—one chameleonic woman, scuttling through old movies that never existed—is mixed into the images rather than dumped over them, with the result that we’re enchanted by the illusion even after we’ve seen through it.In these new works, the artist’s metamorphoses are as agile as ever, and we can always tell when she’s playing man, woman, or androgyne—even her vagueness is precise. But a good performance and a good picture aren’t the same, and, try as I might, I couldn’t convince myself that the vast non–Cindy Sherman parts of these pictures did much of anything that Cindy Sherman wasn’t doing better with her body and face. The backgrounds are all digitally brightened, interchangeable shots of interchangeable, rich-twit destinations, from Bavaria to Shanghai—kind of funny in theory, though walking from one to the next is like seeing a stand-up comic who insists on pausing every few seconds to make sure you’ve gotten the gag. Whatever beauty, say, the images of trees and gardens have to offer fades fast when they’re bunched together (which I assume is the point). Whatever tension, uncanniness, or satirical bite they generate fades faster (which I seriously doubt is the point).In short: I’ve been to better two-hour films. It’d be one thing if Sherman were indifferent to her hype, but instead, she’s shown every sign of caving. As pictures on the whole have gotten smaller and nimbler, this Pictures Generation pioneer’s art has gotten bulkier and slower, not to mention pricier. We’re a long way from 1977, when Sherman aspired to make work that seemed “cheap and trashy, something you’d find in a novelty store and buy for a quarter.” A brave, full-bodied comedian, she’s also a textbook victim of blockbuster bloat, beholden to big-spender audiences who expect the same joke year after year. This article appears under the title “Joseph Kosuth” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 70—71.
ArtNews℗Photography in Fragments℗Zachary Fine℗ArtinAmerica℗07/01/2021℗℗Why is it that photography, more than any other medium, attracts some of the worst writing about art? There are shelves of books on painting, sculpture, performance, and prints that are unafraid to discuss specific artists, movements, or artworks without constant anxious recourse to the status of the medium, and yet with photography, it’s as if there’s something inherent in the technology, a kind of spell, that compels critics to follow a formula. Not many books about photography make it from start to finish without relitigating or rehearsing its origins (Louis Daguerre, Nicéphore Niépce, William Henry Fox Talbot), writing streams of metaphors (photography as truth, photography as fiction, photography as trace, photography as evidence, photography as analogy), or citing the same set of stock theorists (Walter Benjamin, Siegfried Kracauer, Roland Barthes, Vilém Flusser, John Berger, Susan Sontag).Photography does come with certain challenges: it has always been embattled as an art form, prey to easy manipulation and co-option, and highly changeable, with habits of use adapting to shifts in technology. But in addressing these issues, writing about photography relies on a narrow grammar, squeezing itself into fixed patterns and terms. To anyone who reads about the medium with even light frequency, the repetitions and redundancies can be stifling.    David Campany’s On Photographs is guilty of these minor crimes, yet it shows one possible way of working the trap. It begins with some vague throat clearing: Photographs, he writes in the introduction, “confuse as much as fascinate, conceal as much as reveal, distract as much as compel . . . In each one there is a kind of madness.” He repeats the word “madness” (a few too many times) to suggest how unruly photographs are, how they resist being fixed with meaning, even though people have tried to steer them and constrain them with words since the early history of the medium. As Campany points out, Talbot’s The Pencil of Nature, published in six parts between 1844 and 1846, was not only the first commercially sold book to include photographs; it also included texts, some of which described the images and the processes used to produce them, and others that were more tangent.  Following Talbot, Campany lays out the method for his own word-and-image book: “The images do not illustrate a written argument, and the writing is not a script for looking, but together they may bring you closer to the madness.”Upon reading this, one might pause for a second: Are we about to sit through two hundred pages of free-associative prose-poetry that dances around photographs without saying much about them? Fortunately, no.  Campany’s book is a delightful jumble of particulars, and a corrective, in many ways, to theories of photography that concern themselves very little with actual photographs. He includes more than one hundred images, arranged nonchronologically, non-geographically, and non-thematically, each accompanied by a short text that blends description, theory, history, and biography. It’s a kind of madcap survey that makes no claims to being comprehensive but, incidentally, covers a lot of ground. There are photographs from the mid-nineteenth century as well as the twenty-first, from Paris and Mexico City as well as Los Angeles, Johannesburg, Port-au-Prince, Glasgow, and Tokyo. Some of the photographers discussed are famous, but others are barely known or completely anonymous. When he turns to well-trodden, canonical material—Eadweard Muybridge’s motion studies, for instance—Campany doesn’t offer up the familiar image of the horse galloping, or the man leaping, but instead a weird, late example: Chickens Scared by a Torpedo (1884–87). On the next page, there is a 1914 “cyclegraph” by Frank and Lillian Gilbreth, showing the motions of a woman’s hands at work, as traced by beams of light. The text on Muybridge stays close to his biography—we learn about his seminal role in the history of photography and cinema, as well as the fact that he shot the man with whom his wife conceived a child, and decamped after the trial to South America—whereas the text on the Gilbreths blends a folksy meditation on the machine age with a gloss on the Gilbreths’ methods (light bulbs attached to the body) and their promotional attempts to catch the wave of Frederick Taylor’s “scientific management.” A few pages later, there’s a blue sky and palm trees in John Baldessari’s Throwing Three Balls in the Air to Get a Straight Line (Best of Thirty-Six Attempts), 1973; a few pages after that: a bold portrait of a young woman in London’s East End, in 1955, wearing tattered high-Edwardian dress, surrounded by the rubble of war. This kind of whiplash is one of the book’s key pleasures. It steps away from the linear history of photography and attunes the eye to hidden affinities across time and place, visual echoes and patterns—like the three balls in Baldessari’s photographs rhyming with the five bubbles in Helen Levitt’s New York, c. 1942, the strip of circles in Étienne-Jules Marey’s Vertical Ball Drop from 1890, and a circular photograph of George Eastman aboard the SS Gallia by Frederick S. Church, the shape of the photo echoing the portholes on the boat. (“Why are portholes circular?” Campany writes, in one of his factoidal asides. “Corners cause cracks and corrosion.”)The book is also a trove of less-than-familiar photographers—names like Gérard Castello-Lopes, Marianne Wex, and Kwame Brathwaite—whose works easily grip. There are bodies flailing inscrutably, bodies isolated in their coded gestures, bodies configured for commercial purpose; in just a few seconds, we see how the lens has captured the body in so many of its aspects. One of the virtues of structuring a book around images, not just using them as examples or illustrations, is that it can ground history and theory in concreto, and provide a vivid argument for why certain photographers need more attention and study. David Levi Strauss’s book Photography and Belief, is, in many ways, the opposite of Campany’s. It can fit comfortably inside of a small coat pocket and reproduces only one image (a frontispiece depicting a relic of St. Thomas Apostle). The book is not about any one thing, per se, but hovers around the vague plot of land between “photography” and “belief.” What is the role of photography, and seeing more generally, Strauss wants to know, in luring us to believe something is true, factual, firm? He loosely strings together other people’s scholarship, with little in the way of exposition or a guiding argument, to circle this very old question.The first chapter is a rangy mini-essay on the early relationship between seeing and belief in the Judeo-Christian tradition, namely through the figure of Doubting Thomas (who never actually touches the wounds of Christ in the Gospels, despite the countless paintings and drawings depicting him doing so). Strauss then looks at the debates around the Turin Shroud, in particular his “favorite branch of Turin Shroud literature”: those who have argued that the Shroud is a photograph, and potentially the first photograph ever made, and even better, a photographic self-portrait of Leonardo da Vinci himself. The chapter ends with a familiar knee-jerk challenge to the origins of photography: “It might be said that by the time Nicéphore Niépce, Louis Daguerre, and William Henry Fox Talbot made their breakthrough technical discoveries in the nineteenth century, belief in photography had already been around for millennia.”This pre-origin origin theory of photography—that the invention happened long before the first photo was ever taken—has been made many times, memorably in Geoffrey Batchen’s 1997 book Burning with Desire: The Conception of Photography, in which he argued that the beginning of photography couldn’t be isolated to one moment, person, or technical innovation, but was traceable to a “desire” to photograph, a more diffuse discursive formation (Foucault haunts the scene here) that preceded photography itself. As interesting as the idea might be, how many more variations of it do we want or need? And how far back are we willing to go? Why not just start at the origin of language, or the evolution of the first humanoid eyeball? After the first chapter, the book, by a number of standards—academic rigor, critical vitality, inventiveness—starts to crumble. In fact, it crumbles quite literally; it is a book of pieces and fragments: five short chapters, each divided up into short jagged sections, each section cobbled together mostly with quotations. The second chapter summarizes Benjamin, Berger, and Barthes on photography, supposedly as their theories relate to “belief” (though the connections to belief are often unclear); the third does the same with Vilém Flusser. The fourth chapter, entitled “Three Sources,” sets out to “triangulate” the idea that photographs are “more fiction than fact” by stitching together Flusser’s Towards a Philosophy of Photography (again), Ioan P. Couliano’s Eros and Magic in the Renaissance, and Hans Belting’s Likeness and Presence, all in about one thousand words. The final chapter takes a more personal direction— “I love photographs. That means I believe them. It does not mean I am gullible about images, or that I am more susceptible to fakery and propaganda”—and then speculates about the post-photographic future, about the “streaming flow” of images today, which will potentially lead to the disappearance of the image as we know it (i.e., the image as “trace”). This chapter is such a shift in tone, and comes so late, that it seems to belong to a different project. Strauss concludes with “A Brief Anthology of Quotations on Photography and Belief,” as if much of the book itself hasn’t been such an anthology.It could be said that Strauss’s selection of quotations is part of his argument, and that every summary of a canonical text is a rereading of that text (and thus evergreen), and that books do not need to be cleanly or neatly argued but can splay poetically into fragments to illuminate things otherwise invisible. These same points can also be used to explain away the problems of a book that hasn’t been sufficiently edited. Writers today, across genres, are using theorists like Benjamin and Barthes to justify writing scattered and fragmented books, as if the tendency toward fragmentation were enough to make a book interesting and worth publishing. New studies of photography, in particular, would benefit from more intentional plotting or strenuous criteria. They might indicate why, for instance, it’s worth working in fragments, or why it’s worth trotting out the familiar names, the same essays, the same “aura,” the same old studium and punctum—all the greatest hits—as opposed to bringing us alternative theories, different sources, a more varied and global sense of image-making. If the “photograph may ultimately become obsolete,” as Strauss says, then we should think about saving it. Campany’s book provides one possible way of doing so. It cuts into the medium’s history at a new angle and tethers his words to that elusive thing: photographs. This article appears in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 20—24.
ArtNews℗Erasure and Persistence℗Leah Ollman℗ArtinAmerica℗05/01/2021℗℗Harold Mendez’s texturally lush, emotionally simmering show at ICA LA takes its title from the first line of a poem by Juan Felipe Herrera: “Let us gather in a flourishing way.” Following this gentle, affirming invitation, Herrera’s poem oscillates seamlessly between English and Spanish, exemplifying the accretive construction of a single, continuous voice. Mendez’s practice centers on just such a forging of identity from disparate languages and discrete histories. Born in Chicago in 1977 to parents from Colombia and Mexico, Mendez is now based in Los Angeles, where he works across mediums, integrating the found and the made through eloquent acts of assemblage, amendment, and alteration. The years now (2020), an installation in its own dedicated gallery, is the first piece visitors to the exhibition encounter, and also the most recent. Mendez laid down a broad floor of shallow, gridded fiberglass panels that resemble metal stained faintly with rust. A light sprinkling of white carnation petals softens the geometric substrate, from which emerges a sole, stunted tree section, burnished silvery-black with graphite and charcoal. The knee-high form, with its knotted trunk and gnarled, leafless branches, feels equally arboreal and corporeal, suggesting a twisted body or a heart extracted from a chest. Its animate energy contrasts vividly with the static, standardized industrial panels, stretching in every direction like an indeterminate map. Speakers positioned throughout the room emit a scratchy, looping, spoken-word montage, more ambience than discernible message, except for a few clearly audible phrases (“who am I?,” “upside down,” “first breath”), which reinforce the standing hunk of wood’s assertion of presence in a sea of anonymity, its implication of personhood declared, identity positioned. Power, violence, and loss recur as unstable forces in Mendez’s work, countered by the inspiriting persistence of beauty and the organic. A muted palette of ash, dust, and soot prevails in all nineteen works here (variously dated 2012–20), a palette of distillation and temporal remove, as the artist methodically translates colors to a gray scale. Nowhere is this narrow tonal range more evocative than in a half-dozen pieces sourced from photographs. Mendez altered the surface texture, emphasis, and legibility of these images by using a variety of processes and materials, including transfer and abrasion, toner, graphite, watercolor, lithography crayon, and actual soot. Several of the larger pieces, especially, read as spectral hybrids, at once photograph, negative, print, and drawing. It is impossible to tell where the product of the lens stops and the work of the hand begins.In Sin Nombre (Nameless, 2018), Mendez transformed the specificity of a nineteenth-century Cuban archival photograph of a man astride a horse into a stirring emblem of historical erasure, through the reversal of values and the wearing down of the document’s details. The matte, velvety depiction of a spiderweb in At night we walk in circles (2016) quotes from nature as well as, perhaps, Vija Celmins’s prints and drawings with a similar motif. The web’s filaments hang heavy with droplets, like drooping strands of dark pearls. Borders of foliage anchor the ephemeral sight, and what appear to be cracks in the emulsion of the originating image impose a second web, jagged and angular, upon the first, setting off a conceptual vibration between record and recording process. The literality of photographic description is just a starting point; from there, Mendez adds and subtracts to enact a tight reciprocity between image and surface, found and made. Broader social histories and art histories come into play (Mendez has referred in his titles to the Czech photographer Josef Koudelka, the Colombian Melitón Rodríguez, and others), and internal, emotional currents find external form. If the show has an elegiac quality, it conveys just as quietly and insistently, through Mendez’s resonant assimilation of materials and memory, a heartening sense of individual agency. This review appears under the title “Harold Mendez” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 72—73.
ArtNews℗Hang Ten℗Liz Hirsch℗ArtinAmerica℗31/12/2020℗℗At first look, Raymond Pettibon’s exhibition “Pacific Ocean Pop” seemed sparse. Though the show contained dozens of recent drawings and collages by the prolific draftsman and satirist, known for layered, enigmatic, and often humorous portmanteaus of text and image—an illustrated checklist ran to twenty-eight pages—Regen Projects’s white box space was left almost entirely open, and the gallery was empty of other visitors due to pandemic protocol. Organized into thematic clusters surrounded by vast expanses of white wall, the works revolved around pop cultural references and motifs that the artist has employed for decades, including golden age comic book superheroes, Major League baseball, the clay animation character Gumby, and film noir. The semiotic open-endedness of the individual drawings was tempered by their arrangement into well-spaced groupings, offering navigable pathways for interpretation.The thematic core of the installation was the ocean, with large drawings of waves anchoring neighboring clusters of smaller images. In them, rhythmic strokes of blue, green, brown, and chartreuse articulate the concave span of ocean waves as intersecting currents peak in height. The waves are about to engulf the small gray figure of a surfer in No Title (Making a wave); in No Title (Str8 Line) and No Title (The Clear-cut brow), all 2020, only the boards appear, rendered as crescent slivers of bright red and yellow peeking through. Pettibon invokes the ocean’s allegorical intensity, the drawings hinting at everything from looming climate catastrophe to the experience of image and info saturation in a world increasingly lived online.At once spontaneous and studied, Pettibon’s pen-and-ink compositions evoke the caricature of Honoré Daumier, the comics of R. Crumb, and the late 1970s and ’80s second-wave Los Angeles punk era with which he is commonly associated. In 1976, he designed the iconic four-bar logo for the hardcore band Black Flag, whose founding singer, Greg Ginn, is the artist’s brother. Pettibon has often parodied the logo, highlighting both its renown and the ennui that accompanied its mass culture absorption. In No title (2019), the uneven bars appear to “brand” (in strokes of black ink) the buttocks of a cropped seminude female figure whose butt cheek also boasts a five-pointed-star tattoo. No title (I hate that), 2020, features five solid black rectangles of varying heights, resembling a bar graph. Topped by Pettibon’s signature all-capital lettering, each one seems to wage a complaint. One says, “I hate the squares”; another, “I can’t tell you how much I hate the word ‘image.’” At far right: “This is going to be a blockbuster.” The drawing speaks, self-reflexively and frankly, of the repetition—and the boredom—that goes into building a lasting cultural brand.“Sometimes it’s not what you are saying but how you say it that really matters,” Pettibon commented in a 2017 interview. “The language is on fire and you just spit it out.” Left unframed and affixed to the wall with thumbtacks, the works’ display heightened this sense of immediacy. But Pettibon, who now lives in New York, felt less present in this show than in previous presentations, for which he has often spent extended time inhabiting the exhibition space, placing works directly, and sometimes drawing directly on the wall. The resulting energy and messiness were missing from this show, but the apocalyptic tone could not have been more apt for the present day. This review appears under the title “Raymond Pettibon” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 73—74.
ArtNews℗Lessons from a Room℗David Ebony℗ArtinAmerica℗29/12/2020℗℗For some fifteen years, Matthias Weischer, has been internationally recognized as one of the leading artists of the New Leipzig School of German representational painters, which includes Neo Rauch, Tim Eitel, David Schnell, Tilo Baumgärtel, Rosa Loy, Ulf Puder, and others. It is surprising, then, that “Stage,” this impressive exhibition of recent oil-on-canvas paintings, is Weischer’s first US solo.The artists associated with the Leipzig Academy of Visual Arts—once one of East Germany’s premier schools for Socialist Realism—have merged the traditional techniques of painting and drawing that were for decades the Academy’s focus, with avant-garde innovations of Western contemporary figuration and abstract art. Soon after graduating at the age of thirty in 2003, Weischer established a reputation for refined interior scenes and ambiguous spatial relationships—unpopulated living rooms and bedrooms, with intricate details and a consistently hushed, eerie atmosphere. Sometimes they recall the serene  domestic spaces of the Danish painter Vilhelm Hammershøi (1864–1916) or the opulent but vacant interiors of American painter Walter Gay (1856–1937), albeit without the fin de siècle glitz. In 2005, David Hockney selected Weischer for a one-year private mentorship, and the English artist’s influence can be felt in many of the younger painter’s subsequent works. Another major formative experience for Weischer was an extended stay in Rome, in 2007, after winning the German version of the Rome Prize. Thereafter, ancient Roman murals and mosaics stimulated his process and imagination.   The four large-scale and eleven smaller paintings included in “Stage” (all works 2020), feature brilliant color, sumptuous impasto surfaces, and rather uncanny domestic spaces with bright but distressed-looking walls. Two pairs of small works (Mirror 1 and 2; and Disciple 1 and 2) present nearly identical images and matching brushstrokes, examples of a kind of painterly exercise that the artist has employed for some years.Despite skewed perspectives and disjointed figure-ground arrangements, the pictures convey convincing environments. Weischer’s illusionistic devices, including exaggerated shading and subtly nuanced modulation of color, enliven works such as Lounge. In this large canvas, heightened tones of bright purple and deep blue clash with the turquoise ceiling to suggest a compressed—and claustrophobic—living room with modernist furniture. A potted plant with stylized leaves, on the left side of the room, might be lifted directly from an early Hockney painting.On one level, Weischer’s work explores spatial phenomenology. Blue Corner, for instance, shows a nearly empty living room with blue-gray walls and a vase of flowers set on the gold-carpeted floor in the foreground. Using subtle shading and a slightly distorted perspective, Weischer draws inordinate attention to a rather vacant angle in a room, casting the viewer as a “corner reader,” imagining “life in corners, and the universe itself withdrawn into a corner with the daydreamer,” to take a cue from Gaston Bachelard in The Poetics of Space (1958).Over the past decade, Weischer has also delved into landscape and figure studies. Figures appear in the “Stage” works, but only in “paintings” hung on the walls of the depicted rooms. These pictures-within-pictures include an image of two jousting knights in the show’s title piece. The large, resplendent work shows a spare interior with a yellow ochre floor—appointed with a lone tulip in a vase—and a wall bifurcated into white and red horizontal bands. Colorfully patterned curtains flank the room—a green leafy design on the right, and thin, vertical stripes on the left. An oval mirror hangs on the upper left, and at center, two small, indistinct, wall-mounted round objects counterpoint the framed image of the medieval knights, which is positioned under a spotlight.In Olympia, a detail of Manet’s 1863 painting appears in an oval reproduction on one wall of a bedroom with viridian walls. Focused on the servant bearing flowers for the model, the borrowed image commands Weischer’s elusive space, in which a nightstand and the edge of a bed seem unreasonably crammed into the corner. A small clock on the nightstand alludes to the sense of waiting in both scenes and to the great span of time encompassed by Weischer’s painterly homage to Manet. In each of the works in his remarkable US debut, Weischer establishes a sense of grand theater in which time and space are protagonists and the history of art is a scene-stealing costar. This review appears under the title “Matthias Weischer” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 71—72.
ArtNews℗The Well-Dressed Anarchist℗Faye Hirsch℗ArtinAmerica℗22/12/2020℗℗Félix Fénéon (1861–1944) is best known today as the effete dandy—top hat, gloves and cane in one hand, the other delicately tendering a cyclamen—in what Paul Signac called a “painted biography” of his dear friend. Considered one of the Museum of Modern Art’s fin de siècle masterpieces, the portrait bears an ornate title: Opus 217: Against the Enamel of a Background Rhythmic with Beats and Angles, Tones, and Tints, Portrait of M. Félix Fénéon in 1890. Everyone who was anyone on the Paris scene would have recognized M. Fénéon, with his long face, prominent nose, and wavy goatee, here in stiff profile against a pinwheel background of pulsating shapes and colors. Seurat called the style Pointillist, one type of the chromatically “scientific” painting Fénéon named Neo-Impressionist in 1886.Co-organized by MoMA and two Parisian institutions, the Musée de l’Orangerie and the Musée du quai Branly-Jacques Chirac, “Félix Fénéon: The Anarchist and the Avant-Garde—from Signac to Matisse and Beyond” (on view through January 2) features Opus 217 along with dozens of paintings, posters, and ephemera by artists whom Fénéon wrote about and promoted. Notable among them are Henri Matisse and Paul Seurat, in whose careers he was particularly enmeshed, as well as Pissarro, Vuillard, Bonnard, Toulouse-Lautrec, and Vallotton. The show also includes an impressive array of the African and Oceanic sculptures—works Fénéon preferred to call les arts lointains (“distant arts”) rather than the more common art nègre, thus conscientiously avoiding the language of colonialism, against which he railed. And so we have charismatic personages from very different worlds. The eccentric denizens of Toulouse Lautrec’s Moulin Rouge, La Goulue (1891), a poster so desirable it was torn off walls almost as soon as it was pasted up (Fénéon encouraged the illegal practice, which would allow people of no means to become collectors), share the display space with an eerie power figure from the Congo in wood studded with pieces of iron. Cases of elegant statuettes from the Ivory Coast are surrounded by glowing Pointillist and Fauvist landscapes. Many of the works may be traced to Fénéon’s own collections, auctioned after his death in 1944 and here impressively sleuthed; others passed through Bernheim-Jeune, the gallery where Fénéon was artistic director from 1906 to 1924. All were in one way or another touched by the man.The exhibition documents Fénéon’s political activity and that of his radical associates. A Zelig-like character, dubbed celui qui silence (the silent one, or he who silences) by Alfred Jarry, Fénéon was ubiquitous yet discreet, operating mainly behind the scenes as an editor, art and literary critic, translator, journalist, dealer and collector. Paradoxically, given his position in tony circles, he was a lifelong anarchist, arrested in 1894 and narrowly acquitted of a bombing he likely committed. The show includes a famous mug shot of Fénéon on the eve of the notorious Trial of the Thirty, anarchists all, and samples of his largely anonymous political and journalistic writing. Especially delicious are examples of his Twitter-like “News in Three Lines,” brief, proto-surreal reports of crimes, published in Le Matin in 1906.Fired from his position at, of all places, France’s Ministry of War, Fénéon was hired at La Revue blanche, probably the most famous of the dozens of petites revues circulating in Paris. He remained the chief editor until its demise in 1903. There he published covers and illustrations by his Nabis friends and writing by famous figures, from Jarry and Gide to Debussy and Thadée Natanson, one of the magazine’s founders, all of whom would drop by to chat. In the back office, Fénéon pored over manuscripts. There we see him, rapt, in portraits by Vuillard and Valloton, never suspecting he would become the perfect lens through which to refract those most intriguing times.
ArtNews℗Send In the Clowns℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗17/12/2020℗℗What was it with modern artists and the circus? The Impressionists devoted some of their jauntiest canvases to clowns and acrobats; so did Toulouse-Lautrec, Chagall, and Rose-Period Picasso. Calder had a career-long love affair with the iconography of the circus, and for his early masterwork Cirque Calder (1926–31) he built a miniature one, complete with wire sword-swallowers and lion-tamers. This last example suggests why so many radical innovators admired what is basically quaint European folk art: the circus is a charming, low-key alternative to the academic traditions modern art scorned. It is, at the same time, a monumental form. (If you went as a child, you’ve probably never shaken the memory of the elephants towering over you). It’s evocative of a melancholy past as well as a new way forward—unpretentious yet revolutionary, immodestly modest.Jean Dubuffet, whose career was founded on a kind of immodest modesty, was bound to arrive at this subject matter sooner or later. Art Brut, the rough, unlettered style of painting he made world-famous beginning in the 1940s, was supposed to be a rebuttal to the bombast of the Parisian art world, but it ended up plenty bombastic itself. His best works may begin with a childlike simplicity, but they rarely end there: their simplicity is a dagger aimed at the soft skin of civilization, and the longer you stare at them, the more violent complexities they reveal. In the early ’60s Dubuffet began experimenting with ballpoint doodles that seemed the very definition of childishness. Over the next ten years, the experiment yielded drawings, then paintings, then reliefs, then models, then monumental sculptures in epoxy resin. Some of these sculptures are still standing. Many survive as models but were never built. And one, modeled in 1970 and now exhibited at scale for the first time, is called—but of course—Le Cirque.The first thing I noticed about Le Cirque when I saw it at Pace was its clumsiness. The sculpture is comically, endearingly big: thirteen feet tall and almost a hundred feet in circumference, with elephant legs and zebra stripes like scribbles blown up a thousandfold. Since it didn’t have to compete for attention (the only other work in the exhibition was a 1968 maquette of Dubuffet’s equally sprawling Jardin d’émail), it seemed even bigger. As you walk through it, Le Cirque suggests the organic and the architectural all at once, as though the big top has somehow merged with the animals. For all its maker’s prestige, there’s still a whiff of third-grade daffiness in the air—I suppose there are higher compliments for the father of Art Brut, but I’m not sure what they’d be.I’ve got nothing but love for this monster; its cage is a different story. Dubuffet’s late, large sculptures look their best—and were, in many cases, designed to be looked at—en plein air. They feel friendlier when they’re in plazas or next to buildings, closer to us than the structures they decorate. For its full-scale debut, however, Le Cirque has more in common with the building than the spectators. Its polyurethane skin hardens under the ceiling lights, its whiteness feels chillier and less eccentric—in all, it loses some of its pulse. Maybe I’m being unfair to Pace, which can hardly be expected to knock down its walls for the sake of one sculpture. But Dubuffet always had a love-hate relationship with institutions, and thirty-five years after his death, his art is still negotiating with the strictures of the gallery world. This time around, I’m not sure it strikes a good deal.This review appears under the title “Jean Dubuffet” in the January/February 2021 issue, p. 67
ArtNews℗Pandemic Time℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗15/12/2020℗℗A glass ampoule of ash-tinged air hung by a thread in the far corner of “oceaean,” David Horvitz’s second solo show at Praz-Delavallade in Los Angeles. Titled Air de LA (all works 2020), the piece is a redux of Marcel Duchamp’s 1919 Air de Paris, a sample of Parisian atmosphere; this time, the air inside comes from LA during the 2019 fire season. While the original vessel was a common druggists’ piece of the day, Horvitz’s hand-blown approximation is an arcane copy of an antique. With readymades like Air de Paris, Duchamp formalized a particular interwar nihilism; a century later, Horvitz’s twee transposition lands in a time and place in which just driving to a Mid-City art gallery—the smoke from a new round of fires, the virus, the storefronts boarded up—feels like doomscrolling. Horvitz’s exhibition was well-timed in a trough between the second and third waves of the Covid-19 pandemic in Los Angeles. With anxiety ebbing and galleries creaking open, it felt reasonably safe, or at least possible, to indulge in poetic philosophizing about our “condition,” namely the strangeness of lockdown time: circling from day to day, repeating the mistakes of earlier months, refreshing the feed. Accordingly, half of the dozen works on view were clocks: wall-mounted mirrored bars with ice blue digits, placed at different heights. Each clock has been reprogrammed so that time appears to pass differently. On one, the numbers spasm forward; on another, they stop and start. Other clocks go blank or move in two-second bursts. Their titles match their tricks: A clock that falls asleep; A clock whose minutes are synchronized to your heartbeat; A clock whose hands are the shape of rivers. Time is neither meaningless nor plastic, but it is relative, as Horvitz’s timepieces makes plain.When I first saw this show, I felt sentimental. I was prepared to embrace its reassuring quirks (such as the drive-in opening “dinner,” a cocktail in a real glass and a piece of salmon sushi served through the open window of guests’ cars). Rather than reinforce the tyranny of this estranged, estranging time, “oceaean” recited poems about the ways we’re tossed together on its foaming surface. In a 2011–14 series of self-portraits, “Public Access,” Horvitz reprised Caspar David Friedrich’s The Wanderer above the Sea of Fog (1818), an iconic image of man facing the Romantic sublime, on various public beaches in California. In these new works, Horvitz attempts to relocate the sublime for an age of rising shorelines and acidifying seas—placing, as it were, the viewer in the violent spray of pandemic time, the strange and terrifying entity most available to us today. Horvitz states in the epistolary press release that the show’s title, rendered in the innermost gallery as a neon loop of cursive handwriting, nods to Aram Saroyan’s one-word poem “lighght” (1965). Indeed, the word oceaean lingers, overwhelms just a touch, urges language onto the tide. Now, a couple weeks of reality later, the deep whimsy of an “oceaean” mostly recalls what ecologist Bill McKibben called “Eaarth” in his 2010 book of the same title: the planet made so strange beneath our feet, pushed so far beyond repair, that it can no longer bear the old name. On this alien world, marked by oceaean and lighght, the familiar tropes of both Romanticism and Dadaism feel overburdened.
ArtNews℗Painting Boredom℗Hannah Stamler℗ArtinAmerica℗10/12/2020℗℗At a time when events seem to accumulate rather than unfold, when news is always breaking, and boredom alleviated with the tap of a finger, it is hard not to appreciate the slow and absorbing canvases of Henni Alftan. In the nineteen paintings on view in Alftan’s first US solo show, held in both of Karma’s Lower East Side spaces, the Finnish-born painter, based in Paris since the late 1990s, lavishes attention on transitional moments, elevating emotions that are rarely romanticized, like expectation and monotony. Blue Umbrella (2020), showing a figure waiting alone on a street corner in the rain, pays homage to anticipation; Morning Sun (2020), to idleness, capturing the languid beauty of sunlight spilling across a living room floor. Classroom (2020), a depiction of an enlarged wall clock painted from below, places the viewer into the diminutive perspective of desk-bound child, offering an all too vivid reminder of the itching frustration of waiting for the school bell’s chime. Alftan’s work is often described as cinematic, and rightly so. For all their banality and sense of irresolution, her paintings can feel like narrative shards, as if they were scenes clipped from larger film reels, the moments right before the plot takes off. As novelist Hermione Hoby puts it in the exhibition catalogue, Alftan leaves you with a longing to know “what happens next and what might be outside the frame.” Her images seem to be telling a story, but the meanings are inscrutable, and any sense of climax or conclusion out of reach. This impression of unknowability is heightened by Alftan’s flat style of figuration and claustrophobic composition. She gives most of her painterly energy over to capturing textures (the soft down of a fur jacket, the bristle of uncut grass), leaving human flesh comparatively unmodeled—a choice that grants her subjects an immaterial, ephemeral presence. She also favors tight framing, opting to crop and compress views to provide only a sliver of the action. For instance, Hands Behind his Back (2019), a close-up of clenched hands, depicts a gesture of anxiety but gives no clue as to its source. In a similar manner, Body (2020) reveals just a slice of its protagonist, showing a torso outfitted in a sheer party top, bra visible beneath crossed arms. Is this woman on her way in or out? Expressing anger or modesty? Alftan is at her best when she leaves such questions unanswered and less effective when she flirts with legibility, as in The Studio, 2020, a portrait of an artist’s studio that contains an abstracted version of The Jacket (2020), a work shown in the previous room. This easter egg of continuity gives the viewer license to imagine a story—The Jacket part of a larger autobiographical tale—and seemed out of place in body of work so intent on delaying gratification, so against gamifying the process of looking. Alftan is also less effective when legibility is foisted upon her. The most dissatisfying point of the show—the lone curatorial misstep in an otherwise superb debut—came with Haircut (Déjà-Vu), 2020, an example of Alftan’s “déjà vu” diptychs, comprising complementary panels meant to be hung separately. A clever conceit, the effect was ruined by the placement of the paintings in adjacent rooms, too close to foster any real sense of déjà vu or hold the viewer in a state of suspense. The high tension of the first panel, showing a pair of gleaming scissors open around a mass of long blond hair, dissipated the moment its companion came into view. The fateful snip was now accomplished, our need for closure too easily satisfied.  This review appears under the title “Henni Alftan” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 67–68.
ArtNews℗Insects and Angels℗Gaby Cepeda℗ArtinAmerica℗08/12/2020℗℗Viewing Lila de Magalhaes’s exhibition “Spank the Sky,” at Lulu, I was reminded of a recently circulating meme comparing the angels that have come to populate the cultural imaginary—chubby blond cherubs and hot, haloed femmes—to those described in the Bible: animal-headed creatures covered in wings and eyes, full of God’s righteous wrath. The seraph depicted in The Merry Arsonist (all works 2020) would fit right in with the eldritch beings imagined in the Old Testament. A caped creature—part insect, part mammal—cruises through a dark sky, like an emissary from another world, illuminating its surroundings with torchlike matches held up in its many hands. De Magalhaes’s technique lends the scene an eerie mysticism: the show’s five works are all intricate embroideries on dyed and stretched bedsheets, lightly supplemented by chalk pastel. The textures are slightly worn, the colors soft and subdued, heightening the preternatural strangeness of her imagery. In this handful of works, the Brazilian-Swiss artist weaves a tender cosmology where creatures of all kinds meet: earthly and otherworldly, large and small, weird and mundane. In Filhota, set against a field of tie-dyed midnight blue and lime green that is at once celestial and psychedelic, a dreamy centipede circling the center of the composition fixes its buggy eyes on an anthropomorphized butterfly with pouty red lips waving flirtily from the lower left corner. They are surrounded by a similar cast of characters: a buzzing fly with vibrating wings delicately stitched in lilac and pink, a dragonfly with squiggly limbs, a round little bumblebee. The Night Shift suggests a similarly lively after-hours get together. A naked angel with a menacing smile stands on the face of a grimacing flower as a worm playfully chews on its petal. Above them, a dragonfly pursues a butterfly, and another pair of winged insects share a cocktail. In this nocturnal scene, de Magalhaes plays with the cheerful animism typical of children’s books, where teacups and shoes possess names and emotions, but uses it to different ends, imagining living beings that we tend to regard as objects, like flowers and insects, sharing martinis and engaging in light bondage. Only two of the works depict humans directly. In Two Gardeners, a figure peers her eye into a hole in the dirt to find a worm’s eye looking back. The worm is the neighbor of a pair of beets, and a cross section of their underground abode takes up most of the image; the view de Magalhaes presents is their world peering into ours instead of the other way around. But the stunning Pyromania complicates the borders between us and them entirely: delineated in yellow on a pink ground is the outline of a woman’s body viewed from the back, with snails, butterflies, worms, and centipedes catching a ride on top as she crawls away, all surrounded by vibrating, fiery lines. A tangle of human and nonhuman limbs, heads, and eyes, the scene seems less like an emergency exit from a fire than an ecstatic, hallucinatory communion, the euphoric dissolution of boundaries. De Magalhaes’s works remind us of a reality that has become more painfully obvious lately: that nonhuman beings are not and have never been separate from us, that we are all symbiotic partners, sharing a planet—and even our individual bodies—with visible or invisible collaborators. Her depiction of this coexistence as enchanted and poetic offers a welcome glimpse of fairy-tale hope in a world that feels like it’s nearing the end.This review appears under the title “Lila de Magalhaes” in the January/February 2021 issue, p. 77
ArtNews℗The Fabric of Our Nation℗Michael McCanne℗ArtinAmerica℗03/12/2020℗℗Drive long enough on any American highway and you will pass a prison. Even at a distance, its ominous form is instantly recognizable, the telltale watchtowers and razor wire–topped fences marking it as an outpost of the United States’s sprawling penal system. Millions of people are incarcerated in prisons, jails, and detention centers across the country, and tens of millions more must organize their lives around imprisoned loved ones. This web of incarceration is so large that it has its own economy, culture, and demographic trends. In his solo show “American Rendition” at Malin, Jesse Krimes explores the history of the carceral state through a quintessentially American cultural artifact: the decorative quilt. Incorporating different styles and techniques, the twelve large quilts on view feature layered motifs alluding to the modern criminal justice system and its forerunners, slavery and work farms. In North Star (2019), the black silhouette of a person appears atop an image of a birdcage, his body intersecting with a nineteenth- century jailhouse, all framed by a border of Ohio stars, a traditional quilt pattern. At the center of another work, Equality Quilt (2020), a collage of photo-transferred images of protests and phrases like black power crowds into a diamond-shaped space. Krimes surrounds these emblems with arrangements of colored blocks covered in geometric and floral stitched patterns. Incarceration forms the heart of Krimes’s creative inquiry. He studied sculpture in college but developed his work with textiles and collage while serving a six-year prison sentence for selling cocaine. In addition to the quilts, “American Rendition” features five small pastiches that Krimes made in 2009–10, while in federal prison in North Carolina. He created them with a spoon and hair gel, transferring images from newspapers onto canvases made of stretched bed sheets. Several reinterpret famous artworks, such as Botticelli’s Birth of Venus or Michelangelo’s Creation of Adam, replacing the heads of the paintings’ protagonists with newspaper portraits of celebrities and criminals. These smaller pieces presaged Apokaluptein 16389067 (2010–13), currently on display in “Marking Time: Art in the Age of Mass Incarceration” at MoMA PS1, a prison cell–size panorama that Krimes created using the same technique. The quilts in “American Rendition” build on the image-transfer and textile works Krimes developed in prison. Krimes made six of them for a project he organized with the Vera Institute of Justice in 2019, “Voices from the Heartland.” Developed and staged in rural Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, where the artist grew up, the project was intended to draw attention to the fact that rural Americans make up the fastest growing population in jails and prisons, despite conventional notions that mass incarceration is an urban phenomenon. Krimes worked with current and former inmates and law enforcement officers to select the visual themes for the quilts and then with local Amish and Mennonite artisans to construct them. The quilts were originally exhibited in a barn at the center of a corn maze, accompanied by a slate of talks and community events. Other works belong to a new series, “Elegy Quilts” (2020), which touches on the more personal effects of incarceration. Constructed primarily out of clothes and other textiles that the artist collected from current and former prisoners, the “Elegy Quilts” employ patchwork and appliqué techniques to depict empty chairs, inspired by conversations with several inmates about places that made them feel comfortable or at home. Set against beautiful patterns—swathes of floral print fabric or blocks of jagged cloth scraps randomly sewn together—the chairs are meant to represent both the absent prisoner and the domestic privacy and comfort they have lost.Interest in quilting, the archetypal American folk art, declined after the advent of machined textiles in the early twentieth century but was rekindled around the 1977 bicentennial as a way to evoke cherished ideals of American exceptionalism: self-sufficiency, hard work, and thrift. Krimes’s quilts trouble this easy nostalgia. His work asks that we recognize the essentially American character of mass incarceration: from the slave plantation to the modern prison, it is woven into the fabric of the nation.This article appears under the title “’Jesse Krimes” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 69–70.
ArtNews℗Technology and the Flesh℗Dennis Zhou℗ArtinAmerica℗01/12/2020℗℗In the early 1980s, the painter, sculptor, and all-around technological savant Tishan Hsu landed a night job as a “word processor” at a Wall Street law firm. Encountering early computers before they entered widespread use, Hsu spent his shifts engrossed in a now mundane task: staring at a screen. Entranced by the symbiosis between user and machine, Hsu has continued to probe the interstices between the virtual and the physical over the past four decades, blending elements of architecture, medicine, and computer processing into inimitable hybrid objects. Following a debut at the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles in January, “Tishan Hsu: Liquid Circuit,” his first museum survey, was scheduled to arrive at SculptureCenter in New York in May. Delayed due to the pandemic, the exhibition opened in September in an interlinked, computer-dependent world Hsu prophesied. Encompassing paintings, sculptures, drawings, and videos, the show traces an arc from the dawn of personal computing to the advent of social media.Born in Boston to Chinese immigrants, Hsu studied architecture at MIT before moving to New York in 1979. Briefly a fixture of the downtown art scene, exhibiting at the Pat Hearn and Leo Castelli galleries, he went on to become one of the first artists to experiment with Photoshop and digital manipulation, incorporating newfound computational techniques into analog art forms.Hsu’s first exploratory paintings are curious creations, straddling the border between two and three dimensions. Couple (1983) and Squared Nude (1984), vertical wooden panels composed of paint and mixed mediums, evoke Futurism reinvented for the digital age; instead of capturing a flurry of movement made newly visible by photography, they render human cells and orifices as if pixelated on a staticky screen. To create that effect, however, Hsu scratched and etched into his wooden surfaces. Later paintings continued to grapple with the “space” of a screen; to capture both material flatness and virtual depth, Hsu often thrust three-dimensional objects violently through the picture plane. In Outer Banks of Memory (1984), a miniature “screen” rests jauntily against a larger canvas; Fingerpainting (1994), a silkscreen print, juxtaposes Renaissance-esque depictions of outstretched hands with screen-mediated body parts. Despite his interests in technology, Hsu never relinquished a manual sensuousness. (Indeed, some of the main delights of the show are his drawings and smaller studies; delicate, finely lined, and whimsically colored, they are frequently jotted down on whatever Hsu had at hand—a scrap of paper, legal letterhead, an envelope.)Hsu’s dazzling sculptural installations, composed of cellular tiles, exude something humanoid in their fragility, with their knobby bumps, growths, and cancerous protrusions, yet appear simultaneously pastoral, given their likeness to landscapes with hills, gorges, and valleys. In Virtual Flow (1990—2018), plugs, outlets, and wheels protrude from an eerily corporeal, fleshy mass. A wonderful series of aquatint structures—Ooze (1987), Vertical Ooze (1987), and Reflexive Ooze (1987)—resemble swimming pools in their use of lacquered, ceramic tiles, recalling the domestic simulation of nature. Their rounded edges and rippling surfaces only further the uncanny recognition of something commonplace made novel.Hsu’s works are so unique that it is difficult to imagine corresponding movements. Some pieces reveal the influence of Minimalism—Donald Judd’s stacked aluminum boxes, Carl Andre’s floor grids of metal or stone—yet Hsu’s insistent bodily references evade those artists’ impersonal abstraction. Hsu also worked in a different way than his contemporaries in the Pictures Generation. Whereas artists like Richard Prince, Laurie Simmons, and Cindy Sherman used photography to appropriate and critique the imagery of mass media, Hsu remained fixated on the infrastructure of technology. (His closest peer is probably Nam June Paik, less for his video works than for his towers of television monitors.) There are no pop culture references in the exhibition, unless we count one 1986 painting with an eerie resemblance to the Instagram logo, or, curiously, a Xerox copy of Dr. Hibbert from “The Simpsons.” Not gaining traction amid the Neo-Geo and Conceptual movements, Hsu decamped to Cologne in 1988; after returning to the United States two years later, he taught at Sarah Lawrence College until 2019.In hindsight, Hsu’s emphasis on the systems as well as the products of the information age appears remarkably prescient, as we come to realize how Silicon Valley has reshaped both the means and the content of our consumption. At the same time, however, Hsu’s works seem to accommodate the burgeoning tech industry’s ideal of a disembodied—deracialized, degendered—subject. The latest piece included in the show, Folds of Oil (2005), a video with a beeping, breathing soundtrack, implies an evolution of Hsu’s practice into newer forms of technology, focusing on immersive, multimedia installations. Yet this inclusion also belies a more personal, retrospective direction.Between 2013 and 2016, Hsu maintained a studio in Shanghai; in 2019, he exhibited his work from that studio in Hong Kong. (Unfortunately, there was not enough time to include any of it at SculptureCenter.) Repurposing photographs depicting family members during the Cultural Revolution, Hsu scanned, distorted, and reprinted the images onto aluminum panels adorned with silicone forms, suggesting that history can operate much like technology in embellishing and supplanting one’s memories. No longer an outlier in an art world that today includes artists like Paul Chan, Hito Steyerl, and Ian Cheng, Hsu presents works that bear little trace of “Asian futurism”—to borrow the critic Dawn Chan’s term for a techno-Orientalism that situates Asian agency solely in the future—but reflect instead the globally ubiquitous experience of the human subject being rendered into data points to be collected and processed. In the light of his “Shanghai Project,” we can recognize Hsu’s lifelong obsession with absence and embodiment as a reaction to the past as much as to the future, and his collected output as an act of reclamation. This article appears under the title “Tishan Hsu” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp.65–67.
ArtNews℗Experimental Art Unlimited℗Raphael Rubinstein℗ArtinAmerica℗04/11/2020℗℗There’s no better indication that an event or period has been relegated to the past than seeing it become the subject of a volume of oral history. This was the case when Studs Terkel almost single-handedly launched the genre in 1970 with Hard Times: An Oral History of the Great Depression; it was similarly true in 1996 with Gillian McCain and Legs McNeil’s Please Kill Me: The Uncensored Oral History of Punk. By 1970, the era of FDR and the WPA was fading from many people’s memory, just as the heyday of CBGB was receding by the mid-1990s, permitting these oral historians and their informants some kind of clarifying perspective. Yet oral histories also concern the moment in which they are compiled: Terkel’s book appeared in the wake of a new wave of social unrest and hope of political transformation; Please Kill Me followed the emergence of bands like Sonic Youth and Nirvana, which espoused a raw iconoclasm that drew on 1970s punk.Now it seems to be the turn of the early 2000s to get the oral-history treatment. Take, for instance, Meet Me in the Bathroom: Rebirth and Rock and Roll in New York City 2001–2011, Lizzy Goodman’s gossipy, engaging 2017 chronicle of the scene that produced bands such as The Strokes, Yeah Yeah Yeahs, and LCD Soundsystem. About halfway through Meet Me in the Bathroom, record company owner Jonathan Galkin recounts in an interview with Goodman an exchange circa 2002 with LCD Soundsystem’s frontman, James Murphy, about the LP Future Days (1973) by the German band Can. Shortly after listening to Murphy enthuse about Future Days, Galkin, who until that moment had never heard of the album, tells his friend that he has already ordered a copy and that it will arrive in two days. “Jesus Christ,” Murphy exclaims, “it took me 15 years to find that record!” Galkin recounts how he then rubbed salt into the wound: “By the way, now I know everything about the record. Here’s where it was recorded and here’s the gear and here’s the lineup,” which he proceeds to relate by reading, as he recalls to Goodman, from “whatever the version of Wikipedia we had at the time.”In this minor episode from the annals of popular music, at least two revolutionary transfers of power are at play: the eclipse of an old model of cultural capital (arcane knowledge patiently acquired over an extended period of time by obsessive types) by a new one (even the most obscure information instantly available to everyone) and the overthrow of a traditional distribution system (music stores, record swaps, specialty publications, sheer luck) by another new one (almost every recording ever made available for immediate purchase online). Of course, both these revolutions depend on, and are a consequence of, a single phenomenon, the internet, without which no Wikipedia and no Discogs, the massive music database and marketplace that currently lists 11.6 million releases by more than 6 million artists. If the events of 9/11 caused a radical break in the political realm, the advent of websites like Wikipedia and Discogs and the rapid flow of so much knowledge and commerce into newly created cyberspace in the early 2000s had an equally profound effect in the cultural sphere.In 1996, several years before the appearance of either Discogs (launched November 2000) or Wikipedia (launched January 2001), New York artist-turned-writer Kenneth Goldsmith created UbuWeb, an online archive of avant-garde art and literature, historic and contemporary, largely focusing on time-based mediums such as film, video, and audio (the last term encompassing lectures and poetry readings as well as music and sound art). Although far smaller than Discogs or Wikipedia, UbuWeb has had an enormous impact on the contemporary art world by making available to artists, scholars, and teachers around the world thousands of works that would otherwise be difficult if not impossible to access. The offerings range from legendary avant-garde productions such as Guy Debord’s imageless film Hurlements en faveur de Sade (1952) to obscure artifacts such as Gerhard Richter’s Volker Bradke (1966), a 16mm exercise in blurring that is the famed painter’s sole excursion into cinema, to a wealth of contemporary material. If you are curious about British artist Mark Leckey, UbuWeb features twelve of his films and videos. Wondering about Ryan Trecartin? You can binge on eleven of his videos. Mona Hatoum? There are six of her videos made between 1983 and 1994. The elusive David Hammons? UbuWeb hosts four films by or about him. Before UbuWeb, gaining access to even a single one of these works was time-consuming and expensive, so it’s not surprising to hear that, according to Goldsmith, the site is visited daily by tens of thousands of people from around the globe. For me, and I suspect for many of those thousands of users, UbuWeb has had near Gutenbergian impact.It may seem hyperbolic to compare UbuWeb to the invention of movable type, but for anyone teaching postwar art history or working with studio majors, UbuWeb has become not only indispensable but determinative. Rather than supplementing syllabi, the instant availability of so much previously hard-to-access avant-garde material and so many contemporary works often directs the class content. In my own experience, I plan seminars based in part on what is available on Ubu, and it’s very rare that a class meeting doesn’t include viewing or listening to at least one UbuWeb post. I can’t imagine teaching what I teach without it. Outside the classroom, studio majors (at least the more ambitious ones) immerse themselves in the site’s myriad texts, its 5,000-plus films and videos, and its even greater number of audio files: not surprisingly, this exposure affects the art they make.As Goldsmith recounts in his recent book Duchamp Is My Lawyer: The Polemics, Pragmatics, and Poetics of Ubuweb (while not an oral history, the single-voice chronicle frequently evokes a now distant-seeming cultural and technological moment), the site began with the modest project of uploading his collection of concrete poetry in order to make relatively obscure publications more widely available. (The birth of UbuWeb coincided with Goldsmith’s own transition from sculptor to writer, hence, perhaps, his fascination with concrete poetry, which exists between visual art and literature.) As friends and strangers began sharing more files with him, the site grew by 2005 into a multimedia behemoth. This rapid growth was helped by Goldsmith’s practice of never asking for permission from artists or copyright holders before posting their material. As he explains in Duchamp Is My Lawyer, “When you ask for permission, you ask for trouble. What was fun quickly becomes a burden, reeking of official culture. When you ask for permission, you become a business.” Most unwitting contributors to UbuWeb are happy, after the fact, to be included, though if an artist or gallery objects, Goldsmith removes their work, which leads to a certain degree of instability as entries come and go on the site.While Goldsmith’s anarcho-piratical stance has some similarities with Napster, the pioneering file-sharing music site that launched in 1999 and was temporarily closed down by lawsuits in 2001, the generally noncommercial nature of UbuWeb’s content has allowed it to avoid legal battles. For Goldsmith, UbuWeb belongs, like poetry and experimental film, to the “gift economy.” There’s much to be said for not trying to monetize works of art, and UbuWeb can be seen as a welcome attempt to push back against the commodification of the avant-garde, but UbuWeb’s embrace of the gift economy also needs to be seen within the current media landscape in which users usually expect not to pay for what they consume and content creators must increasingly accept not being paid for their work. One can’t help wondering what the members of W.A.G.E. (Working Artists and the Greater Economy), with their campaign for “fair remuneration” in the nonprofit world, make of Ubu’s stance of not paying, nor even seeking permission from its contributors.Goldsmith’s argument is that accessibility is preferable to the pittance that an artist might or might not receive for a concrete poem or an experimental film, and that UbuWeb is able to bring attention to artists and works that would otherwise languish in obscurity. He also argues that in the case of film and video, the low resolution of Ubu’s postings insures that they will never be a substitute for the real thing. (“In terms of quality, UbuWeb’s films are truly a disaster,” Goldsmith confesses in Duchamp Is My Lawyer.) A third line of justification—perhaps the most compelling one—is that the nonprofit UbuWeb is in essence an open library, in which access is not dependent on residency in a city or enrollment in a university. He likens UbuWeb to other “shadow libraries” such as Monoskop, a Slovakian-based site with a wealth of scanned exhibition catalogues, and AAARG (Artists, Architects, and Activists Reading Group), which compiles specialized texts. The first decade of UbuWeb coincided with a growing intellectual and artistic interest in archives. Crucial to this trend was the appearance in 1996 of Archive Fever an English translation of Jacques Derrida’s Mal d’archive (1995). In this widely read text, the theorist asks, among other questions, how recent technological developments—specifically computers and emails, phenomena he calls “archival machines”—might require us to rethink Freudian psychoanalysis. Echoing Marshall McLuhan, Derrida argues that the form of an archive affects its content, that the act of archiving “produces as much as it records the event.” In the late 1990s and early 2000s, more and more artists began emulating archivists, as the late curator Okwui Enwezor recognized in his 2008 exhibition “Archive Fever: Uses of the Document in Contemporary Art.” In his 2015 book Bad News Days, Hal Foster asserts that “an archival impulse returned with special force in the early 2000s, to the point where it could be considered a distinctive tendency in its own right.”) Foster cites artists such as Thomas Hirschhorn, Tacita Dean, and Sam Durant, whose work can be deemed “archival” because it “takes the form of historical probes into people, places, and practices that are lost, outmoded, or otherwise stranded.” (There are currently twelve videos by Hirschhorn available on UbuWeb, though nothing by Sam Durant, and when you click on the Tacita Dean entry, all you find is the notice “These films have been temporarily removed by request of the Marian Goodman Gallery. For all inquiries, please contact The Marian Goodman Gallery.”)Since the early 2000s, “archive fever” has only grown more acute as the capacity for digital storage and the accessibility of the material stored has steadily increased. For perhaps the first time in human history, archiving has become the organizing principal of a civilization. In the past, what limited archives, and thus kept the archiving impulse in check, were the limits of physical space and the sheer amount of physical labor involved in processing material. In a digital environment, space is virtually infinite and assimilation of new material incredibly rapid. (Just think, for instance, of how easy it is for governmental agencies to record and store countless hours of CCTV footage.) The danger, of course, is that a rapidly expanding, instantly accessible archive can turn into a cultural monster that smothers its keepers. Soon my students (and I) may spend so much time on UbuWeb, perusing the collected films and videos of Guy Debord or Ryan Trecartin or Cao Fei, sampling forty-plus recordings of John Cage’s performances and lectures, enjoying all twenty-six issues of the 1980s “Audio Cassette Magazine” Tellus, absorbing thirty-six works in various media from the Middle East (selected for Ubu by the editors of Bidoun), listening to a 1974 talk by Joseph Beuys, watching Oscar Muñoz’s 30-minute-long “water drawing,” and undertaking audio walks with Janet Cardiff, that there will be no time left for any new creation. Or perhaps whatever new work gets made will be so shot through with influences and references that it will be a kind of historical anthology. The fact that thousands of works are available assumes far greater importance than the artistic achievement of any single work. In his 2011 book Retromania: Pop Culture’s Addiction to Its Own Past, music writer Simon Reynolds finds that a similar dilemma affected pop music in the early 2000s: “At a certain point the sheer mass of past accumulating behind the music began to exert a kind of gravitational pull. The sensation of movement, of going somewhere, could be satisfied as easily (in fact, more easily) by going backwards within that vast past than by going forwards.” While fear of creativity being suffocated by weighty precedents is hardly new—the history of the arts is rich with struggles against what Harold Bloom called “belatedness”—none of our ancestors faced anything like the vast scale and omnipresence of today’s digital archives.Although UbuWeb claims Samuel Beckett as its guiding spirit (his photo graces the site’s homepage), Jorge Luis Borges may be a more apposite literary touchstone. Like other mega-archives, UbuWeb effectively combines the protagonist of Borges’s “Funes the Memorious,” the tale of a young man who lies sleepless in a darkened room remembering every detail of every second of his life, with the insidiously infinite collection of books in “The Library of Babel.” Near the end of “Funes the Memorious,” the narrator concludes that for all his prodigious acts of memory—or, more accurately, because of them—Funes is barely capable of thought. “To think,” he observes, “is to forget differences, generalize, make abstractions. In the teeming world of Funes, there were only details, almost immediate in their presence.” Faced with the labyrinthine riches of Goldsmith’s archive, in which there is always one more fascinating item to click on, one more gap in your art-knowledge to fill, one more wormhole to lose yourself in, it might be a good idea to remember Borges’s parables about the dangers of limitless memory and archives without end. (In case you wondered, UbuWeb includes two-plus hours of documentary film about Borges.) No one wants to return to a world where you had to spend fifteen years hunting down a krautrock rarity or wait passively for Anthology Film Archives to screen some vintage Rudy Burckhardt films (UbuWeb currently hosts twenty-three of them, a boon to Burckhardt fans even without the sharpness of movie-theater projection), yet the cumulative effect of that “sheer mass of past” on UbuWeb or any of its online brethren can be a kind of mental and creative exhaustion. Derrida, as we saw, calls this condition mal d’archive. “It is,” he writes, “never to rest, interminably, from searching for the archive right where it slips away. It is to run after the archive, even if there’s too much of it.” Or, we should perhaps add, especially when there is too much of it.This article appears in the November/December 2020 issue, pp. 67–70.
ArtNews℗Charting a Changing World One Loss at a Time℗Gilda Williams℗ArtinAmerica℗20/10/2020℗℗When Cao Fei’s Beijing studio was demolished in 2015, the artist relocated to the disused Hongxia Theater: a mid-twentieth-century movie palace decorated in the drab style of the Sino-Soviet alliance, in which institutional pea-green tempers propaganda’s fiery red. At the entrance of her solo show at London’s Serpentine Galleries (her first in the UK), the Hongxia lobby was reproduced at full scale, complete with curving welcome desk. In vitrines, Cao Fei presented movie ephemera collected during her research into the history of the studio building over the last five years: a lone film reel, tickets, a cinema membership card. An outmoded ATM has been refitted to screen the artist’s interviews with locals who recount their memories of the old theater. Sited in Jiuxianqiao, among China’s most productive techno-industrial districts, the former theater and present studio is now slated for demolition.The exhibition, titled “Blueprints,” featured themes of building, destroying, and rebuilding, whether in reality or virtuality—although such distinctions blur in twenty-first-century China, where cities and technologies expand in tandem at breakneck speed. The centerpiece was the lushly shot, feature-length film Nova (2019), a retro science-fiction movie about a doomed romance between two computer scientists, a Russian woman and a Chinese man. When she is forced to return to the USSR, he submits their only son to a scientific experiment that strands the boy in virtual-reality limbo. The boy roams the empty cinema forever, like an astronaut lost in space. Log-in data streams over early sequences of the film, as if on a monitor screen that can’t boot up: a metaphor for the son’s arrested life. Through a downloadable smartphone app, The Eternal Wave AR (2020), viewers can visit virtual spaces, including a replica of the cinema’s original kitchen, complete with interactive objects like a whirring fan, a newspaper, and a radio. The film’s slow pace and enigmatic atmosphere gives way to “direct” virtual contact with the boy, who begs: “Excuse me, have you seen my dad?” His plaintive voice is quickly dismissed with the swipe of a screen.Adjacent galleries offered a small Cao Fei retrospective. In the stop-action film La Town (2014), the artist has constructed miniature scenes where painted and sometimes bloodied or amputated figurines populate post-apocalyptic scenes: police pursue looters in a supermarket; a solitary figure riding a camel contemplates bombed-out high-rises; luxury developments are invaded by toy diggers and Santa’s-sleigh Christmas decorations. The three-part Whose Utopia? (2006) is the most lyrical of Cao Fei’s films, opening with views of an Osram factory’s automated process for manufacturing light bulbs. The final two sections focus on the employees, seen hard at work untangling piles of tiny electronic components or meticulously taking inventory. Cao Fei offered workers the opportunity to enact their creative fantasies on the factory floor. A few guys perform virtuoso electric guitar solos. A young girl twirls in a winged ballerina outfit while her seated colleagues continue their work, heads down.Unlucky timing saw the exhibition open briefly in March, then close until August. A new virtual reality work, The Eternal Wave (2020), employed an unsafe shared headset, and was canceled and replaced by the reduced AR version described above. We all know our world has altered substantially in recent times; the brilliance of Cao Fei’s art is to show that, usually, change is not as dramatic and sudden as a lockdown. The creation of all-new, replacement cityscapes as well as transformative digital realities both entail an irrepressible, step-by-step process: one failed romance, one demolished neighborhood, one missile, one crushed dream after another. In Cao Fei’s work, people and their things (tiny cars, lighting fixtures, highways) are seen en masse, while animals—a cobra in Whose Utopia?; a giant octopus in La Town; a slow-moving turtle in Nova—appear in isolation, utterly outnumbered by humans, as if the last of their species. Zombies, featured in La Town, spread their undead terror through individual contact. They are a perfect metaphor for Cao Fei’s vision of the world’s slow, inexorable, terrifying change that happens piece by piece, tragedy by tragedy, one lost child at a time. This article appears under the title “Cao Fei” in the January/February 2021 issue, pp. 75–76.
ArtNews℗Monumental Invisibility℗Lucy Ives℗ArtinAmerica℗07/10/2020℗℗Cora Gilroy-Ware’s engaging study of nineteenth-century Neo-Classical sculpture, The Classical Body in Romantic Britain, brings an invigorating new interpretation to a style that many contemporary viewers too often see as either dull or self-congratulatory. A visitor to St. Paul’s Cathedral in London who passes the large marble war monument depicting Captain Richard Rundle Burges may be perplexed to find that this naval captain, who lost his life in 1797 during the Battle of Camperdown, is all but nude. Draped in what appears to be a wrinkled tablecloth, Burges accepts a sizable sword from an attending winged Victory. It is perhaps no wonder that, as Gilroy-Ware points out, the 2012 Rough Guide to London calls this statue “overblown” and questions its dorky sensuality. Figurative marble statuary from this period is indeed hard to look at: derivative of numerous earlier classicisms, it is often engaged in modes of historiography and/or moral allegory that bypass or clash with contemporary concerns and values, promoting sorts of idealism that seem outmoded when not openly celebratory of imperial violence, extractive economic practices, and white supremacy.Gilroy-Ware’s triumph in The Classical Body is to carefully re-politicize what we perceive as the daffiness, essentialism, homogeneity, and what she terms the “Dream” or “Poem” of such plastic works—to permit us to see them again, reknit into the aesthetic and discursive context of their times. She additionally succeeds in drawing connections between the smooth surfaces of these objects and later expressions of Neo-Classicism, from the fluttering garments of modern ballet to the hard bodies of Nazi symbols to the hyper-depilated form of the Victoria’s Secret “Angel.” Her book is generously illustrated with full-page color images of statues, paintings, and graphic works, and it is fascinating to discover therein that what this writer, for one, took to be the cliché of the ubiquitous pale marble statue in the nineteenth century was in fact a complex means of working through an array of dispositions to public life as well as political and national sentiment. For example, Thomas Banks (1735–1805), creator of the seminude Captain Richard Rundle Burges, was a leftist activist, abolitionist, and pacifist, committed to an “egalitarian classicism.” Gilroy-Ware observes that for Banks, “the classical body became a vessel for utopian ideas.” Although Banks’s disposition was not widely shared, it is noteworthy that appropriation of so-called classical styles during this period did not always connote an enthusiasm, on the part of the artist, for endless imperial wars and colonialism. The Classical Body’s central argument is that, in Britain, an engaged form of classicism, associated with radical republicanism and revolution, was gradually replaced by a saccharine, tacitly nationalist classicism as the nineteenth century wore on. Whereas France’s Neo-Classical nudes were tasked with allegorizing the power of the popular body released from the shackles of monarchy, British artists navigated a different set of concerns, more rarely expressing democratic values—or, for that matter, any direct political values at all—through their increasingly “Poetic” works. As Gilroy-Ware writes, “The definition of the classical body was especially sensitive to historicizing tendencies, . . . it readily lay open to revisions at any minute.” The British government’s purchase of the looted Parthenon Marbles from Thomas Bruce, Earl of Elgin, in 1816 is one significant example of the way in which Britain embraced an imperial—here, Athenian—classicism. Artists (such as the aforementioned Banks) for whom the nakedness and dynamism particular to Greek, Roman, and later Italian sculpture might serve as an “emblem” of physical liberty and self-determination, as well as the possibility of a more equal society, were succeeded by individuals more concerned with satisfying middle-brow appetites for cavorting nymphs and militaristic muscle-bound hunks.Gilroy-Ware thus moves the reader from the early 1800s—sometimes thought to have been an era dominated by “Grand Tourism” and the aristocratic manipulation of Classical themes, but which she reads as a more complex and diverseperiod of assimilation of both past sculptural styles and the writings of eighteenth-century popularizers of ancient art such as Johann Joachim Winckelmann—into the second, third, and fourth decades of the century, when what she terms “Poetic sculpture” overwhelms the utopian “Dream” originally embraced by more radical artists. She discusses Banks’s antiwar figures (some of the most revelatory passages in the book), as well as the “draped Dream” of the toga-heavy royalist creations of sculptor John Bacon Sr. (1740–1799), the origination of a “sweet” style by the draftsman and sculptor John Flaxman (1755–1826), the sylph-filled paintings of Henry Howard (1769–1847), as well as the unrelentingly sugary marbles of celebrity-artist Antonio Canova (1757–1822), which she places into illuminating dialogue with the poetry of John Keats (1795–1821). A significant chapter, “Living Dreams and Poems,” considers the horrific treatment of Saartjie Baartman (1789–1815), forcibly exhibited in the 1810s as the “Hottentot Venus,” in relation to changing British mores and conventions of sculpture and display. A regressive culture no longer pursued an “active connection between Greece and Freedom” and saw no paradox in “putting a captured African woman on stage and calling her Venus.” In this chapter, Gilroy-Ware additionally details painter Benjamin Robert Haydon’s use of a Black sailor named Wilson as a model. Having studied and sketched Wilson’s body for a month in 1810, Haydon began a year later writing a series of pseudonymous pieces as “An English Student” for the Examiner, making a series of aggressive pseudoscientific claims regarding white superiority and purported ancestral ties to ancient Greece, employing the Parthenon Marbles as a primary example of his “racial ideal.” Here, Gilroy-Ware demonstrates how the classical body was rapidly becoming a discursive object, enabling the ideology of slavery, “the false consciousness that allowed for the exploitation and exchange of human beings as if they were inanimate things,” to overtake and replace any remnants of egalitarian political sentiment.I first came to Gilroy-Ware’s work via an essay she published in 2019 in X-TRA magazine, “Knowledge-Montage: Page 3, Poetic Sculpture, and Print.” I was immediately taken by her fluency in multiple registers of thought—melding precise art historical narrative with contemporary commentary (on cheesecake tabloid nudes, in this particular essay)—and her highly original style of affect-theory-influenced interpretation. She deployed these in such a way as to permit me to see the interconnections and resonances inherent to the various layers of her scholarship. I was additionally struck by the synthetic and even intermedial nature of Gilroy-Ware’s overall theory of “Poetic sculpture,” a type of derivative image-making that “ushers the viewer into a remote and disinterested space,” one that is pointedly free of accurate historical narrative and rather trades in sentiment and sensuality. Throughout Gilroy-Ware’s writing there is an exciting and, I think, productive tension: While she excels at capturing the material qualities of works of sculpture (“tender, feeding the desire to caress,” “lathered in a balm,” “finished to a lactic sheen”), her goal in The Classical Body in Romantic Britain is not in fact to detail surface particulars or related techniques but rather, as she writes, “to de-aestheticize objects by bringing to light their lost connection to politicized art.” That she comes to this de-aestheticization by way of the haptic and visual qualities of sculpture forces us to contend with the works in question both as historical objects and as objects located squarely, and often uncomfortably, in the present. In this sense, Gilroy-Ware writes against modernist novelist Robert Musil’s ironic contention, cited in The Classical Body, that “there is nothing in the world as invisible as monuments.” Gilroy-Ware re-substantiates appropriations of the Classical body along with related value systems; in other words, she renders visible that which she ably deconstructs.This article appears in the November/December 2020 issue, pp. 74–75.
ArtNews℗Slumming It℗Andrew Marzoni℗ArtinAmerica℗29/09/2020℗℗In the 1970s, New York looked like a city in decline. The Mayor’s Office had been running a deficit since the 1960s, borrowing to balance the budget, but in the spring of 1975, the banks that had kept the city afloat declined to extend further credit, initiating a fiscal crisis. By October 16, New York was on the verge of bankruptcy, which President Gerald Ford famously refused to alleviate. The Municipal Assistance Corporation, a committee formed several months earlier to manage the city’s finances, and composed almost exclusively of bankers, pivoted to enforcing austerity. The policy was buttressed in 1978 by the establishment of the Emergency Financial Control Board, which was also concerned with finding market-based solutions to the scarcity of funds. This subtle takeover of key governmental functions by financiers resulted, in the short term, in mass layoffs of civil servants, rollbacks of social services, and the proliferation of the most potent symbol of what had come to be known as “Fear City”: abandoned tenement buildings. Set on fire by deadbeat landlords in the South Bronx and occupied as squats by artists on the Lower East Side, these structures and their neighborhoods birthed two of the most influential art scenes in the history of New York, if not the world. Artists fought governmental mismanagement as one might expect them to: by sublimating their frustrations, seizing the city’s transformation as their subject and their cause.In the long term, the fiscal crisis fostered the financialization of the city’s economy, planned gentrification, and gross mishandling of the AIDS epidemic. Following historian Kim Phillips-Fein and others, Andrew Strombeck, professor of English at Wright State University, argues in DIY on the Lower East Side: Books, Buildings, and Art after the 1975 Fiscal Crisis that this economic reconfiguration of New York contributed to a broader breakdown of the “long networks of the Fordist economy.” Alan Greenspan, chair of President Ford’s Council of Economic Advisers, weaponized the crisis to advocate for “a new moral politics” that preached financial responsibility and reductions in government spending, providing an ideological blueprint for the contemporary Republican Party. Artists and writers downtown, Strombeck contends, found new ways of “doing it yourself,” by which he means much more than making homemade clothes or zines. The mandate to hustle triggered by a shrinking social safety net resulted in a primitive version of today’s gig economy, and provided a new model of the ideal laborer: “people who love their job, value creativity, and who don’t mind working unpaid overtime.” While these “culture workers,” as Strombeck prefers to call them, can be credited with the gentrification of the Lower East Side (and by implication, the rest of New York, San Francisco, the world), they also practiced a politics of community and resistance that demonstrated “the possibility for living and creating outside of the self-management demanded by post-Fordist work.”Strombeck sees this turning point in economic, political, and cultural history reflected in the work of New Yorkers who spent the fiscal crisis making art: he devotes chapters to Gordon Matta-Clark and David Wojnarowicz; painter Martin Wong, writers Miguel Algarín, Bimbo Rivas, and other affiliates of the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, the nonprofit performance space established in Alphabet City in 1973; novelist-critics Kathy Acker, Gary Indiana, and Lynne Tillman; and the editors of the little magazines Semiotext(e) and Between C & D. The DIY ethos born of austerity and exhibited in this work represents, for Strombeck, a “utopian possibility at the moment of Fordism’s destruction,” when our present reality of Amazon, Uber, TaskRabbit, and OnlyFans might have gone another way. It is under the rubric of dot-matrix printed journals and storefront galleries, do-it-yourself tenant advocacy, afterschool programs, and banking that the arts flourished during times of trouble, in physical spaces reclaimed by artists whose formal inventions mirrored the conditions of their lives.For Strombeck, the monologues collected in Wojnarowicz’s Waterfront Journals (1978–80) preserve “a narrative record of lives that appear in corners of the post-crisis city’s disused landscape, only to disappear under the underclass-scapegoating logic of redevelopment.” Wojnarowicz cruised the West Side piers in the guise of an amateur anthropologist (a role he would reprise with more zealous political intent amid the AIDS crisis and the culture wars) while Matta-Clark made art out of disused buildings in the Bronx, illegally cutting holes that celebrated their inherent value. The theoretical reappraisal of these buildings into objets d’art because of his excisions parodied real estate’s exploitation of neighborhoods for profit, which Strombeck reads as antithetical to the artist’s leftist stance, a signpost “toward private-public models of development that would assume more and more primacy in the aftermath of the financial crisis,” and culminate in the High Line.But Chelsea is not the Lower East Side, nor is the Bronx, or even SoHo, and Strombeck’s specious geography suggests the inexactitude of an outsider. Matta-Clark did not live or work on the Lower East Side, and though the legacy of Semiotext(e) has merged with the myth of downtown because of the writers it has published, the journal was founded uptown, on the campus of Columbia University. Strombeck is quick to indict dilettantish attempts to explain New York to New Yorkers when they appear, for instance, in the work of French philosopher Félix Guattari, who presented an insensitive paper on “blacks in Harlem” to the audience at the Semiotext(e) “Schizo-Culture” conference at Columbia in November 1975, sharing a bill with Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, William Burroughs, and John Cage. As Strombeck himself notes, the innovations of Black culture in Harlem and the Bronx at this time were far from insignificant, and the imprecision of his purview makes their absence here conspicuous. DIY on the Lower East Side does not purport to be a comprehensive history, but its case studies offer variations on a theme rather than a coherent thesis about the Lower East Side, assigning ’70s New York’s most radical energies to the neighborhood by association.The book’s argument hinges on “the indelible mark” left by the fiscal crisis on art and writing of the period, “shaping the ways” its authors “thought about modes of living, working, and making art.” Some of them (Wojnarowicz, the Nuyorican poets) were prolific activists, but Strombeck praises Between C & D’s editors Joel Rose and Catherine Texier especially for “documenting downtown instead of curating it,” functioning as “archaeologists” rather than trying (and inevitably failing) to “represent” the Lower East Side. Strombeck’s terminological distinction (and occasional slippage) implies a conflict between the documentary and representational modes that his methods, steeped in French sociology, “surface reading,” and “post-critique,” fail to unpack. The book’s attention to Indiana and Tillman is welcome, as they deserve more appreciation in the field of literary studies than they have received, but the analysis is not always as insightful as Strombeck supposes it to be. His explications are often too cursory or allusive, as in a passing evaluation of an Indiana story as “typically queer,” or the insistence that Tillman’s “Madame Realism” columns, many of them originally written for this magazine, “anticipate” the critical practice of philosopher Jacques Rancière. One would hope to find more life in a work of ostensibly biographical criticism than Strombeck seems willing to supply: what of the artists’ friendships, rivalries, and affairs—or rare finds such as an early short story by Anthony Bourdain in Between C & D, which is referenced without comment?One reason for this may be the sheer ambition of Strombeck’s project, which traverses disciplinary boundaries in search of a conception of DIY that is political as well as aesthetic: though “DIY is absorbed into late capitalism itself,” he writes, “we can nevertheless see in DIY a desire for ways of living outside of the boundaries of work.” The inclusion of Acker, already the subject of voluminous scholarship, feels perfunctory, and it’s not exactly clear why the art criticism of Tillman and Indiana—commissioned, edited, and paid for by legacy publications—belongs in this genealogy. But Strombeck’s research on Between C & D, the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, and El Bohío, a disused public school building converted into a theater and arts center by the community organization Charas, supplies a corrective to more cynical accounts of the counterculture post-1975, elaborating an ethos that “meant taking into your own hands what the government has stopped providing,” one that was “well-meaning and complicit, activist and entrepreneurial.”It is not exactly reassuring to learn that the pioneers of gentrification were no less ambivalent about disadvantaging others for mere subsistence than the current class of ostensibly progressive urbanists for whom real estate colonialism is the norm. Yet the archive is rich in what could have been, pre-Starbucks and Giuliani. Neoliberalism has not yet succeeded in killing New York for good, but in times of crisis, communities cannot live on mutual aid alone, and it will take much more than a DIY attitude to ensure a future for the people, the buildings, and the art that call the city home.This article appears in the November/December 2020 issue, pp. 72–73.
ArtNews℗Algorithms Can’t Automate Beauty℗Kyle Chayka℗ArtinAmerica℗21/09/2020℗℗You feel the subtle effects of algorithms while using digital platforms: Spotify automatically plays another song based on what you already like; Instagram shows you the stories first from the accounts you interact with most often; and TikTok, dispensing with agency entirely, just gives you a feed of videos “For You,” no choice about who to follow required. Algorithms are designed so that you don’t necessarily recognize their effects and can’t always tell whether or not they’re modifying your behavior. A new body of work by the interdisciplinary artist and technology activist Trevor Paglen—on view at Pace Gallery’s London venue, with a virtual version online—attempts to visualize their workings.“Bloom” is a series of high-resolution photographs of flowering trees. The sprays of blossoms are tinted different colors in variegated sections, a slightly nauseating spectrum of reds, yellows, blues, and purples. The colors are the biggest sign that something inhuman has happened: they don’t seem to follow a single logic and their arrangements are too granular to have been executed by hand. As Paglen explains in a video published by Pace, the colors have been assigned by machine-learning algorithms developed by his studio that dissect the images’  textures and spatial arrangements, then apply colors to mark differences. Flowers might stay bright white while the trees’ leaves and branches recede into blues. Looking at the images means trying to decode what the computer was evaluating when adding color.Flowers are a perennial artistic subject, from the Dutch Baroque memento mori that Paglen references in the video to Andy Warhol’s screen prints. But his visualize how a machine perceives an image. The algorithms interpret no symbolism; there’s no ephemerality or tragedy latent to a springtime blossom. The colors emerge from a mathematical process that could be applied to any other image. The elegiac quality of the series comes from the contrast between the content of the images, familiar to human viewers, and the coldness of the machine’s gaze. We don’t really know what it’s looking for, or at.Paglen’s recent work, both at Pace and in a concurrent exhibition at the Carnegie Museum of Art, evokes the uncanniness that we feel when using Spotify, Facebook, or Tinder. These platforms purport to calculate our judgements and tastes and then replicate them, serving us our own desires so quickly that we don’t have time to consider how well our identities are being reflected by the algorithms’ decisions. Over the past decade, since he earned a PhD in geography in 2008 from the University of California at Berkeley, Paglen has become famous for using his practice to reveal things that are hidden, making media headlines as much as exhibitions. He moves between formats—photography, collage, renderings, and installations of technological devices—to expose contemporary artifacts like the physical cables that undergird the Internet and souvenir badges from classified Pentagon programs. In recent years he has shifted his attention to artificial intelligence, exploring how machine vision is shaping our perception of the world.“Bloom” shows that beauty can’t be automated—at least, not by the technology we currently have. More than a series of visual alignments or colors, beauty lies in our memories of the world, the connection of a flower to the experience of spring inevitably passing. Algorithms lack any understanding of this context; they can only approximate it.In his “CLOUD” series (2019), Paglen uses algorithms to analyze transcendental photos of the sky; he has continued exploring this technique using the mountainous landscapes in the American West, as seen in the Carnegie exhibition. He applies calculations like Hough Circle Transform, first introduced in 1962 to detect circles in images, and then retains the results on the print so that the viewer knows what the machine has seen: thin white circular outlines with dots at the center identify patterns that the human eye would otherwise pass over. The algorithmic lines recall the jokey meme in which the golden ratio is superimposed on any image and always fits something, like Donald Trump’s hair. Paglen’s series appears ominous—machines attempt to perceive beauty by reducing it to straight lines and perfect shapes—but it’s also a little goofy. The patterns don’t change our understanding of the photographs, and the photographs don’t educate us about the algorithms. They function as illustrations.Paglen tends to hide his critical epiphanies in sumptuous visuals. Viewers may get lost in color or pattern and turn away after a few seconds. Paglen’s activist bent—the artist as investigative journalist or social educator—competes with his urge to make compelling objects. In the best examples, like the “Bloom” series, these goals merge. Art history meets the technological filter through which we now experience much of visual culture, via iPhone cameras, Instagram posts, and TikTok feeds. Once we learn to recognize the influence of algorithms, Paglen hopes, we might figure out how to counter it and reclaim some of the humanity of our vision.
ArtNews℗Ancient Grains℗Madeline Weisburg℗ArtinAmerica℗08/09/2020℗℗Though Rochelle Goldberg’s exhibition “Psychomachia” originally opened at Miguel Abreu in early March, before New York's lockdown, the show revolved around what has since become the signature foodstuff of the COVID era: the sourdough loaf. The floor piece Picnic (2020) comprised twelve crumbling rounds of bread that were formed around glass bowls and studded with coins. Another such loaf rested on a low plinth in Great Gardener Makes (2020), surrounded by scattered crumbs. In Bread Garden (2020), hunks of bread were cast in aluminum and spread amid piles of tuna cans.Goldberg is known for her inventive use of organic materials—ranging from snakeskin to wild lilies to felted tufts of human hair—employing them in ways that emphasize their particular behaviors and properties. Among her signature materials is chia, a plant species that propagates quickly and spreads across surfaces like grass, which she often uses to grow carpets that sprout and die over time. Other installations have incorporated pools of crude oil that emit harsh fumes as they evaporate. The peculiar array of sculptures and installations in “Psychomachia” were inspired by the story of the fifth-century saint Mary of Egypt, a prostitute and later Coptic penitent who self-exiled from Egypt to the desert, where she is said to have survived until her death on just three loaves of bread. (I was told by gallery staff that the artist’s dough recipe was the result of rigorous research into medieval breadmaking.) In these works, Goldberg directs her material fixations toward religious legend, using Mary’s miraculous ability to sustain her body amid the most inhospitable conditions to reflect on processes of growth, transformation, and decay. Sourdough, after all, is the product of a microbial magic trick—a kindly form of rot. Once it has been baked, it eventually hardens and molds, beginning a new process of mutation.Mary’s effigy appeared in melancholy busts like Intralocutor: towards an attraction (2020), a fragmentary rendering of the saint’s head and emaciated torso cast in bronze and ornamented with glittery eyeshadow, and The Life and Death of Mary (2020), an alluring sequence of hazy monoprints lining one wall, illustrated her grim tale. While this obscure early Christian hagiography was likely unfamiliar to most viewers, Goldberg emphasizes the underlying relationship between bodily deterioration and sanctification, often expressed, in these works, as a tension between animate and inanimate. This comes across most clearly in sculptures in which the artist preserves ephemeral materials at particular stages in their life cycle, presenting them as symbols of both durability and change. In Soiled [Resurrected] (2017–2020), for instance, foam slabs crusted with gold foil, bronze powder, and chia are embalmed in shellac, so that the superfood seeds can no longer grow. The loaves in Picnic are the byproduct of sourdough starter, a culture that can live in perpetuity if fed—a process suspended once the bread is baked. Goldberg’s sculptures are neither fully alive, nor dead, simultaneously occupying logically conflicting metaphysical poles—in a sense, like Mary of Egypt, who persists on a spiritual plane despite the transience of her body. But the most affecting aspect of these works is the way that Goldberg makes materials like bread and chia seem mutable and unfamiliar, unexpectedly charged by history and myth.
ArtNews℗Among Friends℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗24/08/2020℗℗Ault + Beck (2019) by James Benning is a simple wooden sign bearing the Joshua Tree, California, address of his artist friends Julie Ault and Martin Beck (in better times, Benning often visits them). When their old house sign grew too weathered, the two asked Benning to replace it. He lettered the sign in the blocky, born-again style of “outsider” artist Jesse Howard, even including Psalm 148:8, a line about storms and hail. (The next day, it snowed—a desert miracle.) The sign is included in “Down the Rabbit Hole: JB in JT,” an online exhibition hosted on the website of the Los Angeles gallery O-Town House that pairs photos of Benning’s work arranged in Ault and Beck’s home with descriptions of each piece written by the three friends. The texts offer glimpses into the artists’ relationship, their shared interests, and the way these bonds structure their corners of the art world. At a time of isolation, the project reflects on how artworks can recall the absent friends who made them: for an exhibition that is essentially pictures of someone else’s collection posted on a website, it is strangely bittersweet.Benning is best known as a structuralist filmmaker, but the exhibition opens a window onto his more homespun practice of channeling American folk artists like Henry Darger and Bill Traylor by producing pieces in their respective styles. After Traylor (2004), for instance, a crude pair of drawings on cardboard displayed atop a pile of books, copies Traylor’s silhouettes of a woman in a rocking chair and a startled looking bull. Many of these works have been gifted to friends, while others adorn the walls of two cabins Benning constructed on his property in the Sierra Nevada, replicas of the retreats of Ted Kaczynski and Henry David Thoreau, respectively. The cabins, described in (FC) Two Cabins by JB, a 2011 book edited by Ault (and depicted in the show, open on a wooden box), map the spiritual poles of antisocial living: love of nature, and hatred of civilization. In their own cabin, Ault and Beck display Freedom Club (2009), a carved wood sign naming the fictional group of environmental terrorists to whom the Unabomber attributed his crimes. (Benning originally made the sign to decorate his Kaczynski cabin, later replacing it with one reading “FC.”)  After Thoreau (2011)— a copy of one of the property drawings Thoreau made for his day job as the town surveyor of Concord, Massachusetts, in the 1850s—is presented in a vintage tramp-art frame on a white brick wall. The obsessive way Benning studies folk artists and the informality with which he disperses the results evoke the spirit of his sources. Benning rarely exhibits these works—with the notable exception of a handful of shows curated by Ault.Benning explores the role of compulsion and loneliness in the artistic process. At the same time, he demonstrates how art can anchor conversation and community—most clearly represented in the Joshua Tree cabin by After Beck 11 × 15 3/4 (2013), a plywood rectangle painted black. Benning traded the piece, the story goes, for one of Beck’s paintings of the same size; he meant to reproduce the original, but it was beyond his ability. Benning’s painting now hangs where Beck’s once did. The “JB in JT” artworks mark out the way ideas and objects serve as tokens within a coterie of artists, whose friendships and careers grow intertwined. The provenance of the monochrome rectangle on the plain wall is as intimate as it is professional.   
ArtNews℗From the Archives: Ron Gorchov at Fischbach Gallery℗Edit deAk℗ArtinAmerica℗21/08/2020℗℗The painter Ron Gorchov died on August 18, at age ninety. In celebration of his work, we are sharing this review of Gorchov’s 1975 solo show at Fischbach Gallery by Edit deAk, published in our September–October 1975 issue. —Eds.The recurring elements in Ron Gorchov’s shaped canvases are two marks in the center of a color field. The marks are symmetrical and vertical, and they reflect each other as the two sides of the human body do. The paintings themselves are curve-edged rectangles, either horizontal or vertical, with the corners of the stretcher rounded like four wooden elbows. The canvas surface itself is slightly concave and is cut just at the edge of the stretcher; glued to the support, it is slightly ragged since it is not hemmed. Each painting has two colors, one for the double mark, one for the ground. Mixed with white lead, the brilliant indigo, vermilion, emerald, cobalt violet, turquoise, ultramarine or cadmium (etc.) becomes heavily opaque, gaining a surface that enhances the visibility and play of the brushstrokes. The slippery, thick brush marks are generally busier and more patterned around the double motif, as if responding to a magnetic field—or like a concentric echo. In the latest paintings in Gorchov’s show, the brushstrokes were most directionally uniform; they were also in thinner layers or even simply laid on in one coat.The presence of the double motif is constant, but its shapes vary from painting to painting. There are internal marks long enough to reach the top and bottom of the canvas; as if to compensate for their elongation, they may veer laterally to the left and right sides at the curvatures of the top and bottom. In other cases, the internal marks may be short and fat, or they may be wavery and worm-like—expressive, evocative. These motifs function both as images and as focal points—as locators in complement to the perimeter—or, poetically, like wounds in the heat of Passion. (Other titles are Brother, Promise, Life, Luck, Divine Light. This touching corniness, nowadays, seems to signal unhidden honestly.) Gorchov’s constant pairs of marks always remain fragile in their search for shape; they are informed by an awkwardness probably necessitated by a desire to put a personal twist into abstract painting without becoming literalist. These enveloping works are like so many radars simultaneously gathering and emitting. The personality of the pieces overwhelms the possible formal issues. In Gorchov’s idiosyncratic format, which is reminiscent of a medieval shield, there is no automatic anonymity of received structure. From the historical continuum which holds that the shallower the space of a painting, the greater the degree of accomplishment, Gorchov has evolved a very personal structure that expresses a particularized experience as human to human—maker to viewer. This provides a kind of seeing which makes one feel.
ArtNews℗From the Archives: Ron Gorchov at Vito Schnabel℗Saul Ostrow℗ArtinAmerica℗20/08/2020℗℗The painter Ron Gorchov died on August 18, at age ninety. In celebration of his work, we are sharing this review of Gorchov’s 2005 solo show at Vito Schnabel, published in our November 2005 issue. —Eds.This exhibition, Ron Gorchov's first in over a decade, offered an overview of the painter's work since the 1970s. The 75-year-old Gorchov started his career in New York in the late 1950s, making Abstract Expressionist-derived paintings. Abandoning this approach in the 1960s, he began to develop works that were characterized by an eccentric mix of formal and expressive concerns. In a non-programmatic manner, he linked the issues of abstract image-making, nonrelational composition and objecthood.The earliest paintings in this exhibition employ the shaped-canvas format (a bowed surface and rounded-off corners) that became Gorchov's signature. These shaped canvases feature scruffy monochromatic grounds over which float paired forms (generally thin verticals). Another device he used to emphasize the objectness of his paintings was to leave exposed the ragged edge of the canvas and the staples used to attach it to the stretcher. By these various means, Gorchov makes the viewer aware of the painting's surface and support.This interest has continued throughout his career and is a fundamental aspect of two large freestanding constructions consisting of vertically stacked, monochromatic shaped canvases. One of them, a piece that was first shown in the 1970s but only recently completed, the 20-foot-high Entrance (1972/2005), consists of two 15-foot-wide canvases—one yellow, the other blue—balanced like a lintel on two posts of equal height, one made of four differently colored canvases, the other of six shorter ones. By the 1980s, however, Gorchov was creating asymmetrical pairs of organic forms or singular shapes. Continuing to employ a shaped support, he turned to spontaneously painted forms and drawn elements that can only be described as expressionistic.The most recent works in the show—a group of modest-sized, somewhat painterly striped compositions in a conventional, flat rectangular format—seemingly mark Gorchov's abandonment of the shaped canvas. Across his different formats, Gorchov has emphasized the primacy of color, process and form; he is not a conventional formalist who would reduce painting to its essential qualities. Instead, in the manner of painters such as Ralph Humphrey and Al Held, Gorchov has pursued a supremely personal brand of abstraction.
ArtNews℗Youth in Revolt℗Max Pearl℗ArtinAmerica℗12/08/2020℗℗According to eyewitnesses, sergeant Myron Pryor was the first person to fire at the crowds of unarmed protesters at Kent State University in Ohio, around half past noon on May 4, 1970. Other National Guardsmen followed suit, killing four of the two thousand students gathered to denounce Nixon's invasion of Cambodia (twenty-year-old Sandra Lee Scheuer wasn't even protesting; she was on her way to class). Eleven days later, in the midst of a national student strike that closed more than 450 schools, police opened fire on student protestors at the historically Black Jackson State College in Mississippi, killing a seventeen-year-old from a nearby high school and a Jackson State junior. Marking the fiftieth anniversary of these killings, Interference Archive’s online exhibition “Walkout: A Brief History of Student Organizing” presents a selection of art and ephemera related to student movements. Primarily drawn from the volunteer-run Brooklyn organization’s collection, which is devoted to the history of activist art and cultural production, the show includes materials that date from the 1960s to the present, ranging from protest posters to punk zines to political memes.In an introductory essay, the curators locate the birth of the student movement in the postwar period. The 1944 G.I. Bill dramatically expanded access to higher education in the United States, followed by a period of economic prosperity and a baby boom that tripled the student demographic, teeing up the American university as a staging ground for the radical ’60s. Organized by decade, the show offers a sense of student activists’ major concerns at different moments. Sections devoted to the 1960s and ‘70s are dominated by responses to the Vietnam War: students were horrified by the prospect of being drafted to fight and die in Vietnam, but they were also uneasy with the academy's role in producing military intelligence and technology. The term “university-military complex” comes up repeatedly in a 1969 pamphlet called “How Harvard Rules,” which includes a flow chart illustrating the institution’s ties to warmongers and corporate profiteers. From the 1980s onward, a central preoccupation is educational austerity measures.Much of the material consists of low-budget Xeroxed documents like newsletters or student publications, often accompanied by pen doodles and political cartoons. But there are pieces that stand out for their artistry, like “Is He Protecting You?” (1964), a poster produced by photographer Danny Lyon for the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. It depicts a helmeted Mississippi state trooper against a blurry backdrop of white segregationists, with the titular phrase superimposed at his eye level, following his glance like a ballistic weapon. “End the Ugly Plastic War” (1970) is a transparent poster credited to UC Berkeley professor Jerrold Ballaine, for which he used a vacuum sealer to imprint the title on a vinyl sheet. Ballaine and his students originally designed the poster to be held aloft while protesting the bombing of Cambodia, but it is closer to Pop art, in its wry engagement with commercial aesthetics, than to typical protest graphics, standing in stark contrast to the proto-punk silkscreens of the French agitprop collective Atelier Populaire. Their iconic poster “Mai 68: Début d'une lutte prolongée” (May 68: the Beginning of a Prolonged Struggle), featuring the bright red silhouette of a factory flying a revolutionary flag, is reprised in Josh MacPhee's 2018 Risograph print “University as Factory,” which Interference Archive gave out during May Day demonstrations that year. Atelier Populaire’s influence is also seen in Jesse Goldstein’s poster “Stop The Budget Cuts” (2012), used during strikes against tuition hikes at Québec universities. In the rudimentary single-color print, the fingers of a hand have been sliced off with scissors until only the middle one remains, accompanied by text reading: “There's only one thing left to do: stop the budget cuts!”Mostly limited to a single archive’s collection, “Walkout” is more eclectic than comprehensive. Graphics and posters are frequently interspersed with text-heavy documents, interrupting the flow of the viewing experience, and the contextual information offered about the objects on view can be frustratingly inadequate: the 1980s section, for instance, includes only four items, one of which is an above-the-fold newspaper scan that cuts off all the articles, while the 2000s section includes a political meme in German with no English translation or explanation. As a result, the exhibition is not strictly useful as a record of how the aesthetics of student protest have developed over time. What it does offer is an enjoyable hour or two of clicking through history.
ArtNews℗Remembrance of Flings Past℗Jameson Fitzpatrick℗ArtinAmerica℗03/08/2020℗℗If you’ve ever wondered what Andy Warhol, Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, or William S. Burroughs was like in bed, look no further than John Giorno’s Great Demon Kings. In this memoir, completed the week before Giorno died last October, the poet, artist, and one-time impresario of the downtown New York scene has spared no detail—or past lover.The gossip, like much of the vividly reported sex, is quite hot. Warhol was orally fixated and didn’t like to be touched; there’s a scene of foot worship, too. Rauschenberg’s asshole—which he became “addicted” to opening to Giorno—was “soft, silken, voluptuous.” Giorno also takes credit for permanently enlarging the size of Rauschenberg’s nipples through his loving attention to them. With Johns there’s a lot of morning sex, glossed over with an uncharacteristic lack of specificity, though we’re assured their lovemaking was “wonderful.”Some of the sex comes off as more complicated: fucking Burroughs (a habitual premature ejaculator) for the first time, Giorno thinks: “Your dick is as small as a clitoris. You misogynist, if you knew that I’m thinking that your ass is a cunt and your cock is a clit, you’d explode with anger.” They have a threesome with Allen Ginsberg, Giorno’s lifelong frenemy. Sucking Ginsberg’s dick, Giorno writes, is “a fate worse than death.”If you fear I’ve given all the juicy parts away, don’t worry, there’s plenty more. Giorno and Rauschenberg first get together after Rauschenberg shows up—heartbroken—at his apartment, in a nearly successful attempt to catch his then boyfriend, choreographer Steve Paxton, in flagrante delicto with Giorno! Giorno also dates Brion Gysin—who hates his Tangier neighbor Jane Bowles! There are plenty of details about art and poetry, too: accounts of openings, performances, dinners, and parties. But taking a cue from Giorno’s own narrative priorities, it seems appropriate to lead with sex.The impulse behind Giorno’s candor is, importantly, not vindictive—perhaps with the exception of how he portrays his relationship with the intensely private Rauschenberg, who once threatened to sue if Giorno included him in the memoir. Still, this book isn’t so much a tell-all out to settle scores as it is an organic extension of Giorno’s unyielding sex positivity. Even those not-quite-idyllic encounters mentioned above are, in Giorno’s account of them, made beautiful. His first time with Burroughs culminates in a spiritual experience (he feels as though he achieves union with death in the moment of Burroughs’s orgasm) and lays the foundation for an enduring friendship. When he and Ginsberg share a cab downtown after the threesome, he describes a moment of “pure transcendent connection” between them.For a memoir by a gay man who came of age in the mid-twentieth century, Giorno’s book is—like the life it describes—astonishingly free of shame. His parents, well-to-do Italian Americans who worked in the fashion industry, are peripheral but supportive figures. There’s no coming-out narrative here, not even a coming-to-terms with his sexuality, just one mention of a high school girlfriend in the preface and, four pages later, Giorno’s first self-identification as a “gay poet,” during his sophomore year at Columbia. Of his twenty-one-year-old self in 1958, Giorno writes: “I was young and beautiful and that got me what I wanted and all I wanted was sex.”Giorno’s unabashed celebration of gay sex set him apart from many of his lovers, particularly Rauschenberg, whose calculated reticence he respected (in his lifetime, at least) even as he firmly rejected it for himself. Giorno cites his “Pornographic Poem,” composed of language appropriated from a gay erotic story, as an early career breakthrough. The poem first appeared in Ted Berrigan’s mimeographed magazine C and was later included in An Anthology of New York Poets, published by Random House. Giorno never considered himself part of the New York School, however, and has choice words about a few of its members: in one pivotal scene, Frank O’Hara—who “could be a bitch”—and John Ashbery give a reading Giorno finds so boring that it spurs him on to his subsequent innovations in performance and sound poetry.Giorno’s not shy about anything in this book, including own his good looks—ample evidence of which Warhol furnished, for example in Sleep (1964), his five-hour-and-twenty-minute film of Giorno sleeping. But Giorno’s pulchritude was also the source of an insecurity unique to pretty people: the fear that he was afforded his early opportunities on account of his attractiveness (and the famous lovers it attracted) rather than his talent, and that those famous lovers would forever overshadow him. Of his rise in the late ’60s, he wonders: “As a young poet, did I deserve it? [...] Or was I just a beautiful piece of meat?” Recalling an Anne Waldman poem about visiting Johns in the Outer Banks that makes no mention of Giorno—even though she joined the vacationing couple on his invitation—he writes: “It felt all too familiar: as I had been with Andy, and then Bob, I was edited out of my lovers’ stories.”That moment might be key to understanding an implicit project of Giorno’s memoir: to reassert his presence, unequivocally, in the record. But an unfortunate consequence of that agenda is how much time and space Giorno devotes to his various lovers at the expense of writing in greater detail about the rest of his life—including his own work. The book’s subtitle—“A Memoir of Poetry, Sex, Art, Death, and Enlightenment”—would more accurately reflect the book’s content if “sex” topped the list.We get glimpses, of course, of Giorno’s artistic and curatorial practice: “Pornographic Poem” (not, frankly, his best) is reproduced in full; he recounts collaborating with Bob Moog on sound poems using the Moog synthesizer, as well as the comic ease with which a weekend of reputation-making poetry concerts at Central Park’s Naumburg Bandshell in August 1968 came together (“I told the city I wanted to have a poetry festival, and they said, Wonderful, come get a permit”). The most illuminating section on his own work describes Dial-a-Poem, the poetry-on-demand phone service Giorno devised and managed in 1968–69. A single telephone number connected callers to a rotating collection of recorded readings by Giorno and various friends—John Cage, Jim Carroll, and Bernadette Mayer among them—in an attempt to realize Duchamp’s wish to “send art over the telephone.” The original Dial-a-Poem ran for nine months, during which time it became a media sensation, especially after an obscenity complaint, lodged by a mother enraged to discover her twelve-year-old son listening to Carroll’s ribald contribution, led to a brief shutdown. Though Dial-a-Poem has been staged multiple times since (including a 1970 installation at the Museum of Modern Art) and is currently operational at +1 (641) 793-8122, it’s thrilling to read about the first launch—and the technical obstacles Giorno overcame to keep it running.More often than not, however, Giorno’s non-romantic recollections tend to be cursory. He dedicates just two pages to the AIDS Treatment Project, which he founded in 1984 to redistribute money raised through his record label, Giorno Poetry Systems, to people with AIDS. Supported by benefit concerts and artist-donated royalties, the AIDS Treatment Project offered emergency cash grants of up to $5,000; by 1994, it had given  $460,732. In a moment of renewed interest in and support for mutual aid, this initiative seems to merit a longer, more edifying discussion.Throughout the book, Giorno’s Tibetan Buddhist practice informs the vocabulary and perspective with which he narrates the events of his life; many passages wouldn’t be out of place in a Dharma talk. Of writing his first poem, in high school, Giorno recalls, “When it was finished, I felt very happy—a bright white feeling, a brief moment of bliss. From which comes the words follow your heart.” But his description, in the book’s final section, of traveling to India to meet his root teacher Dudjom Rinpoche, is rather anticlimactic. Even his account of visiting the Dalai Lama (having tagged along with fourteen-month-old Uma Thurman and her parents, notable Buddhists) lacks the vigor of his writing—so rich in passion and psychological insight—about his various love affairs. This might be endemic to the subject matter, or a problem of form. Though Giorno often wrote brilliantly in verse about seeking the end of seeking (see: “Grasping at Emptiness,” “Thanx 4 Nothing”), this paradox conforms less tidily to the conventions of narrative.Giorno’s memoir is an incomplete self-portrait, even as it offers intimate perspectives on the great demon kings—“people controlled by their big egos”—he loved. Perhaps it’s meant to be a compliment that his partner for the last twenty-two years of his life, the artist Ugo Rondinone, is relegated to the brief epilogue. While anyone interested in the avant-garde circles in which Giorno was so enmeshed will find plenty to savor and be titillated by within, an unfamiliar reader could, I fear, come away from this book without a sense of what a truly mesmerizing performer he was. I suppose there’s YouTube for that. And, even as some of what motivates Giorno in this book seems to be a desire to edit himself back into his lovers’ stories (and claim responsibility for Rauschenberg’s “hog tits”), perhaps what’s lacking—a greater emphasis on his own art, curation, and organizing—is evidence of his approach, from another angle, of enlightenment. As he writes on the very last page: “I believe and feel in a soft way that I have lived a failed life because all my accomplishments were based on the force of my ego. I have one more really important thing to do, and this is to die.” Those of us who loved him only from afar are fortunate he graced us with this final word first.
ArtNews℗A Dance of Death in the Realm of Land Art℗Nicholas O'Brien℗ArtinAmerica℗29/07/2020℗℗Theo Triantafyllidis’s exhibition “Ritual” is presented by Meredith Rosen Gallery as a website, though one could also say it takes place in two other locales as well. One is a remote abandoned mining town in the California desert, where the artist installed and documented his sculptures, made of found and 3D-printed components. The other is a game engine, where digitized forms and environments based on this desert milieu meet in a simulation, a self-playing game where elements interact with each other according to programmed rules rather than human volition. The cameras in the simulation follow various vignettes; perspective changes at random. Triantafyllidis’s photo and video documentation of his sculptures and looped excerpts from his simulation alternate in the downward scroll of the “Ritual” website. The two kinds of media play off each other, generating a complex system that engages and builds on the traditions of Land art by not only intervening in a place but representing the site’s openness to change.Triantafyllidis enhances the rugged, ruined quality of his chosen desert site with post-apocalyptic imagery. Digital animals run amok in a place forsaken by humans. Mounds of scrap metal and hard-to-identify dilapidated machinery are littered throughout a derelict building’s concrete boxy frame. What look like overturned satellite dishes, helicopter rotors, and rusted I-beams jut from the ground haphazardly. Plumes of smoke rise up from far-off trash heaps. A drone’s-eye-view shows scattered activity in a cluttered area.Triantafyllidis frequently documents his sculptures through brief video loops rather than still photographs, to evoke the effects of weather and light. In some birds are meant to be caged (2019), taxidermied crows perch on a salvaged Bird electric scooter, one clutching a cigarette butt in its beak. On the “Ritual” website, the crows’ feathers and the hair extensions dangling from the handlebars move gently in the wind. The simulation brings to life the pun on nature and tech, as the crows take the Bird for a joyride around the blown-out landscape. A cackling pair of animated hyenas watch the crows from a broken-down sedan, blasting club music from the car’s speakers. These beasts also appear in Frens I and Frens II (2020), tapestries ordered from the kind of weave-on-demand service that turns JPEGs into textiles. In the documentation they lie on a rock, baking under the sun and rippling in the breeze.At one moment, the simulation’s camera hovers over marching ants, each carrying a bit of detritus—a plastic flower, a pill, an obsolete tape cartridge—as they circle a precarious sculpture reminiscent of the balanced objects in Fischli & Weiss’s photo series “Equilibres” (1984-86). There’s no analogue to this structure among Triantafyllidis’s physical sculptures, though the virtual work might be seen as a sly reference to the garbage-picking process behind Decoy II (for that fucken oil squirting drone), 2020, a bird’s nest woven from dry palm fronds, feathers, and construction fencing, with a pair of bright yellow ping-pong balls as eggs in the center. Triantafyllidis digitally manipulates some photos and videos to make them resemble simulated space. Images of mountains and ruins appear against monochromatic backgrounds: pale gray, muted pink, or construction-fence orange.Land art has had a complex relationship with media and technology. Interventions at remote sites were—and are still—experienced primarily through documentation. Michael Heizer addressed this problem by producing photographs representing his earthworks at a one-to-one scale. The actual-size prints gave the artist a control over the work in the gallery that he couldn’t exert on the site. In his 1968 essay “The Sedimentation of the Mind: Earth Projects,” Robert Smithson champions Heizer for his use of “dumb tools” like picks and shovels, arguing that these achieve a deep connection to the land that is impossible when it’s shaped by the developer’s bulldozer, which “turns the terrain into unfinished cities of organized wreckage.” Though both artists opted for excavators to realize large scale projects, especially after 1968, they continued to ground their interventions in simple gestures. The wild space that surrounds the legible, geometric interventions of Land art, and the post-industrial ruins left by unartistic uses of heavy machinery, constitute Triantafyllidis's chosen site. His statement casts the inscrutable ritual shown in the work as an example of how “Nature is healing.” This may be a cynical evocation of COVID-19 memes for promotional purposes, but it might also be an assertion of the simulation’s sensitivity to flux. Triantafyllidis’s approach to Land art isn’t an attempt to establish control, as Heizer did with his one-to-one scale photographs; it honors the spontaneity of conditions at the site.Triantafyllidis has used computer simulation to create controlled chaos in works like Seamless (2017) and How to Everything (2016), where menageries of animals, robots, vegetation, and squiggly patterns interact with each other as they carry out seemingly random tasks. Over time, the absurd logic of these relationships becomes legible as the viewer begins to discern the program’s rules. In Ritual the randomness is hemmed in. The work is more cohesive than the artist’s earlier simulations. But Triantafyllidis showed those earlier works in galleries, where simulations ran in real-time on computers installed in the space. The online exhibition “Ritual” has to face the technical limitations of running software in a browser, where inconsistent internet connectivity could make the work unviewable. This accounts for the decision to present Ritual on the website as prerecorded clips rather than a live simulation. (At the bottom of the “Ritual” page, there’s a link to a YouTube video preserving the stream from the exhibition’s opening, when the software did run live.)As a result, the online exhibition seems like excessive mediation. With its shifts between simulations, documentations, and eye-tricking digital manipulations, “Ritual” is a more engaging scroll than the online viewing rooms that have become the standard exhibition format during the pandemic. Triantafyllidis is making the best of a tough situation. But in the end, the site brackets his work into framed images, limited perspectives, and prerecorded loops. Perhaps it’s best to think of this as a gesture toward the potential of simulation as a direction for Land art: a sketch or a proposal for how we might rethink ideas of site and mediation.
ArtNews℗Daniel Canogar’s Data Abstractions℗Michael McCanne℗ArtinAmerica℗27/07/2020℗℗After three months with the internet as my primary portal to the outside world, I was intrigued by the premise of Daniel Canogar’s latest work: “to expose the hidden threads of data networks.” Inside bitforms gallery, six large, wavelike metal structures covered with modular flexible LED screens hang on the walls or sit on the floor, all part of the artist’s “Billow” series (2020). Streaks of neon green, red, blue, pink, and yellow light creep down the screens, the product of a data visualization program that Canogar created. Each animated color represents a Google search trend in real-time: as the word or phrase grows more popular, the color warms in tone. The bands of color appear to move across the sculptural screen constructions in succession, from the front of the gallery to the back. This creates the sense that these sculptures form one continuous unit passing in and out of the walls and floor.The installation brings to mind the fiber optic cables on which the internet’s endless flows of data travel underground and on the ocean floor. Canogar’s work, however, renders the data on the screens without much context; we have no sense of what search terms the colors represent or how they relate to each other in scale or frequency. Occasionally, near-illegible words drift through the chromatic stream, denoting particularly popular search terms. I managed to make out a few blurry letters before they ran off the curved screens.When mostly awash in a bright color, the screens resemble the kind of corporate sculpture found in large hotels and convention centers. But when multiple colors run down the screens in darker tones, throbbing and pulsing as they move over the bends, the sculptures become evocative of living organisms. Occasionally, a dark patch will join the blurred-out words floating through this colorful stream, like a bad thought passing through the internet’s psyche. The installation periodically turns completely dark, as if resetting itself, and the once-colorful sculptures transform into black shapes recalling curved sheets of graphite. As the data streams back in, it creeps from one screen to the next as a thin drop of color, followed by others until the screens are full again.Over the past decade, Canogar has made a number of sculptural series employing flexible LED screens. Some earlier versions had their wiring exposed at the back, resembling something you might find described in a William Gibson novel. This cyberpunk aesthetic is also evident in series like “Small Data” (2014), which feature overhead projections onto tangles of wires and broken computer parts, creating a formal interplay between the messy materiality of the electronics and the projected light. The “Billow” works are more polished, which places greater emphasis on the content conveyed: at times, they seem less like sculptures than sleekly designed information displays. The sculptures are technically impressive, at times even mesmerizing. But abstracting Google search trends draws attention to the flow of information without revealing anything about it. Rather than demystify the powerful tech company’s machinery, the sculptures transform its data into indecipherable visuals. In doing so, they risk becoming merely a pleasing simulacrum for digital information and yet another screen to distract ourselves with.
ArtNews℗Art and Technocracy℗Lindsay Caplan℗ArtinAmerica℗22/07/2020℗℗At the end of her book Think Tank Aesthetics: Midcentury Modernism, the Cold War, and the Neoliberal Present, Pamela M. Lee summarizes the ethos propelling the pernicious nexus of art and politics suggested by her title: “How to instrumentalize freedom—weaponize it?” Lee’s is one of two recent studies that aim to historicize the ways that the language of art has served to legitimize the logic of neoliberalism. The affinities are well known, and hinge on this duplicitous use of "freedom." Artists are the ideal neoliberal worker: innovative, flexible, inclined to valorize and personalize risk. Corporations are quick to frame their profit motives using the terminology of experimentation and social praxis that once enlivened avant-garde manifestos. American politicians in both parties continually invoke freedom of expression and personal choice to justify dismantling social services such as public schools and health care, subjecting them to the operations of the market. These convergences among art and neoliberalism are largely formal, and feed on slipperiness: What kinds of erasures have to occur for creativity and experimentation to legitimize privatization? What sort of collapse in historical understanding has to take place for the proprietary practices of corporations to be articulated as the pinnacle of democratic engagement and the common good?John Beck and Ryan Bishop’s Technocrats of the Imagination: Art, Technology, and the Military-Industrial Avant-Garde takes on these questions by focusing on the agency of language. Examining actual collaborations between artists and Cold War era military-industrial institutions, the book is organized around a series of case studies: György Kepes’s Center for Advanced Visual Studies, founded at MIT in 1967; John Chamberlain’s 1969 residency at the RAND Corporation, organized through the Art + Technology program at Los Angeles County Museum of Art; the group Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.), cofounded by Robert Rauschenberg and Bell Labs engineer Billy Klüver; Buckminster Fuller’s construction of geodesic domes for the US military; and Charles and Ray Eames’s immersive film installations for IBM and the State Department. The authors show how such partnerships were made possible by a shared vocabulary: creativity, experimentation, collaboration, interdisciplinarity, and research. They also stress an alignment between these artists and institutions in their techno-utopianism, mutual enthusiasm about new technologies like computers and cybernetics, and a sense that these were not only new tools but models for a nonhierarchical, flexible, efficient, and more enjoyable world. Politically, the artists ranged from staunch Cold Warriors (the Eameses) to progressive leftists (Kepes) to casual bystanders (Klüver and Chamberlain), but they were all “liberals,” and the vagueness of this term is part of the point. At the center of Beck and Bishop’s analysis is the history of US liberalism as it mutates from the interventionist agenda of the Progressive Era to the soft-power mechanisms of neoliberalism, with its emphasis on deregulation, free trade, privatization, and the uncoupling of the government from public interests.Technocrats of the Imagination sets out to chart the active—albeit at times unwitting—role that artists played in this political shift. Central to this history, Beck and Bishop argue, are the philosopher John Dewey’s ideas about the interrelation of science, art, and democracy. Through institutions structured by his pedagogical vision, such as the Bauhaus and Black Mountain College, as well as reading groups among those working with the Works Progress Administration and the Federal Art Project, multiple generations of artists—including many of the figures examined in the book’s case studies—were exposed to Dewey’s ideas about interdisciplinary work and experimentation, and sought to put them into practice. For Dewey, these creative models were part of a larger program of expanding public access to knowledge and implementing an experimental, liberatory program of education for all. In the hands of artists, Beck and Bishop claim, Dewey’s broad social vision narrowed into a focus on technology, organizational structure, and experimental and collaborative methods of research as valuable in and of themselves. As Beck and Bishop argue, “progressive liberalism delivered a conception of science and technology as coterminous with democracy and creativity that was realigned during and after World War II as a mode of expert technocratic managerialism.”The book’s case studies help us see that this realignment occurred as radical social imagination was displaced by an emphasis on the formal qualities of technology and artistic practice. This is not a story of depoliticization, Beck and Bishop argue, but the replacement of one political strategy with another. The pressure on arts to embody politics—immediately and absolutely—engendered a set of categorical confusions: calls for participatory democracy morphed into claims for the liberatory potential of interactive media; interdisciplinary exchange among experts replaced visions of expansive, emancipatory public education for all; and demands for publicly funded research to solve social problems were tempered as private corporations implemented experimental research methodologies that unleashed a wave of cool new things on the market.Lee’s Think Tank Aesthetics takes this argument one step further by contending that this formalization of politics—the slippage between surface and substance, politics and form—is endemic to neoliberalism. It’s not just that concepts like creativity, collaboration, and interdisciplinarity have changed, but that they are purposefully capacious, strategically employed to obfuscate and even instrumentalize paradox. This is by design: Lee shows how neoliberalism thrives on confusion, the breakdown of coherence, the degradation of signals, and the perpetuation of noise. It functions through forgetfulness, the erasure of history, and a continual shape-shifting that makes its operations of power difficult to locate and thus counteract.Usually historians look to the economic crises and austerity measures of the 1970s as the start of neoliberal policies, but Lee locates the seeds of neoliberalism earlier, in the US think tanks founded in the postwar period and aimed at research and development in the broadest terms. It was here that interdisciplinarity came to be understood as an inherent good. Think tanks not only collaborated with artists (something Lee addresses in her 2006 book, Chronophobia: On Time in the Art of the 1960s, but mentions only briefly here), they also drew on methodologies and theoretical insights from fields as diverse as psychology, anthropology, political science, engineering, aesthetic theory, design, and art. Think tanks are therefore characterized by “structural blurriness,” a descriptor Lee borrows from sociologist Thomas Medvetz. They are universities without students, spaces where the government can go to pursue projects without accountability—they are, in her words, “extra-academic” and “para-political,” terms that indicate how unbounded these institutions are, uncoupled from oversight, regulation, and protocols. Think Tank Aesthetics shows how aesthetics are instrumental in perpetuating and operationalizing this blurriness, because, Lee argues, they take our attention away from history and point away from the actual seat of power.Aesthetics can be used to various ends, of course, but for Lee, this is precisely what makes them useful for a political system that thrives on obfuscation and deceit—especially when this system seems to be at its most liberal, accommodating, and free. Case in point: Lee’s conclusion looks at the David H. Koch Plaza outside the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, because there “a public plaza becomes a sanctuary from a billionaire’s caustic mission against the notion of the public itself.” One strength of Lee’s book is how it excavates much less obvious examples of the insidious use of aesthetics and art to argue that this operation is at the core—rather than mere surface or facade—of contemporary power.The book is organized into a series of encounters between individuals responsible not only for collaborating with artists but also for importing a whole analytic armature derived from art history into think tanks, and eventually the apparatus of neoliberalism at large—developing what Lee argues amounts to an entirely aestheticized worldview. One chapter looks at the relationship between art historian Meyer Schapiro and RAND defense analyst Albert Wohlstetter, who took courses with Shapiro at Columbia in the 1930s and regularly corresponded with the scholar for decades. Lee analyzes Wohlstetter and Schapiro’s distinct engagements with semiotics, a field indebted as much to cryptography and information theory as to literary studies or art. Both drew on the already interdisciplinary field of semiotics to grapple with the instability of the signifier—in Wohlstetter’s case, to plan for all possible contingencies in a wartime scenario, and in Schapiro’s, to open up the overly prescriptive practice of iconography in order to acknowledge a range of possible interpretations. Lee’s purpose in examining how these figures intersected is to show that debates about the relationship between form and its meaning were not confined to art history or the humanities but also occupied the intellectual energies of those at the center of US strategy and power.Again and again, Lee returns to the ways that forms come to mean different things in different contexts and can be deployed to distinct ends. In a chapter on “pattern recognition,” she traces the usage of this approach—which presumes the meaning of visual signs is inherent to their surface, capable of disclosing previously unseen dimensions once decoded—through anthropology, art criticism, and Gestalt and pop psychology, all fields that intersected with RAND in the late 1940s and ’50s. She also locates this way of thinking through patterns and surfaces in contemporary strategies of computing and data analysis, which similarly reduce everything to a set of signifiers and codes. In contrast, Lee’s chapter on Cybersyn, the real-time information-sharing network designed for Salvador Allende’s socialist government in Chile between 1970 and 1973, offers a model of a data network intended to be collectively owned, operated, and controlled, reminding us that such technologies can be wielded differently outside our current surveillance capitalist system.Crucial for think tank aesthetics is the erasure of examples like Cybersyn that not only point to other worlds but suggest that the power of things is in their use, not their form or design. Allende’s government was overthrown by a military junta before Cybersyn could be fully implemented, but it was resurrected as an artwork in 2007 by the Chilean new media collective or-am. For Lee, its continued existence as an artwork is evidence that art can counteract the amnesia so important to neoliberalism, if it effectively operates like history or archival research. The book’s final chapter is devoted to contemporary artists whose work examines the relationship between secrecy and power, including Jamal Cyrus, Trevor Paglen, and Jill Magid. Works like Cyrus’s large-scale drawings of redacted COINTELPRO files (Cultr-Ops on Wax, 2015) or Magid’s Authority to Remove (2008)—an installation of neon text and an artist’s novel based on her real-life interviews with members of the Dutch Secret Service, for which she was not allowed to take notes—thematize governments’ power to censor and withhold, but as the book makes clear, they also can and should be read as evidence of the proprietary politics of knowledge that uncouples governments from the people that they no longer even pretend to serve.Think Tank Aesthetics covers a sprawling range of examples and counterintuitive comparisons spanning disparate fields, but the crux of Lee’s book is the stark contrast between RAND and Cybersyn. Both are interconnected networks of information sharing, data analysis, speculation, and projection, as well as centers of control. But Cybersyn was intended to decentralize information sharing so as to optimize industrial production and better meet the public’s needs, while RAND funded experimental research in an expansive array of fields for the sole purpose of centralizing power by privatizing knowledge in the hands of a technocratic elite. To forget form’s historical contingency is to fall into the trap of “think tank aesthetics,” which not only distracts us from the real operations of power but naturalizes them, obscuring how things could be otherwise.Utopian wagers about the power of both art and technology often hinge on the idea that small experiments can be seamlessly scaled up—that a flexible network of information sharing, for example, can not only foster democracy but is democracy realized. Together, the historical narratives charted in Think Tank Aesthetics and Technocrats of the Imagination show that such assertions about the politics of form mean very little when forged within institutions and social systems that so blatantly contradict these claims. What becomes apparent is that an emphasis on certain forms can obfuscate the agency of others, such as the form of modes of production or the distribution of knowledge and control. Far from marking the end of formal analysis, these books move toward its expansion by applying it to these framing structures instead of artworks. There may be hope for the tools of art history yet.
ArtNews℗Pure Camp℗Hannah Stamler℗ArtinAmerica℗22/07/2020℗℗In the great adolescent divide between camp people and non-camp people, the late photographer Andy Sweet was ardently pro-camp. In 1968, at age fourteen, he began attending Camp Mountain Lake, a sleepaway camp in North Carolina that catered primarily to Jewish families from his native Miami, and then returned as a counselor and photography instructor. During the summer of 1977, while an MFA student at the University of Colorado at Boulder, he took a series of pictures at Camp Mountain Lake that would become the basis of his thesis project. Though the negatives were lost after Sweet’s untimely death, in 1982, the series has been meticulously reconstructed from surviving contact sheets and reprinted in Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah: Andy Sweet’s Summer Camp 1977, a new volume from Letter16 Press, edited by Brett Sokol with an introduction by Naomi Fry.Together with Shtetl in the Sun: Andy Sweet’s South Beach 1977–1980, published by Letter16 last year, the book offers a compelling portrait of an artist who possessed a preternatural sense of self despite his young age, and who was well on his way to cultivating a trademark style. Inspired by artists like William Eggleston, he shot exclusively in color at a time when black-and-white was still synonymous with fine art. He also viewed photography as a resolutely subjective enterprise. Part of a new generation of artists redefining documentary around sentiment and personal experience, Sweet believed that photography was not the proper place for impartiality, for the process required “belonging, knowing, and understanding.” It was intimacy, not detachment, that permitted the artist to properly bear witness, and as Fry observes, Sweet’s photographic gaze was “always tempered by a decidedly non-scientific sweetness, humor, and sadness.”Sweet photographed what he knew and what he loved, saturating these realities with the lushness of full color. In the series collected in Shtetl in the Sun, he paid homage to the Jewish retirees transplanted to Miami’s South Beach from Eastern Europe, by way of the Mid-Atlantic—a peculiar half-assimilated tribe (surrogate grandparents, all) who wedded the traditions of the Old Country to the vices and pleasures of the new. A precursor to this body of work, the photographs in Hello Muddah, Hello Faddah are best understood as its complement, reckoning with the younger Jewish-American set to which Sweet belonged. Born in the United States, the boys and girls of Camp Mountain Lake were secular and assimilated. But despite being more American than Jewish, they still straddled the hyphenate of their identity, participating in the star-spangled summertime idyll of camp within a closed and insulated circle, one that was implicitly Jewish, if not explicitly so.That Sweet was a member of this circle is clear from the photographs, for he had an obvious gift for putting his campers and fellow counselors at ease. In shot after shot, they register the camera as one might acknowledge the presence of a friend. The youngest campers, still uninitiated in self-consciousness, deliver grins so earnest they border on grating. The big kids, perhaps emboldened by the lack of parents, use the lens as a mirror for rehearsing new attitudes without repercussion. In one of my favorite pictures, three older girls sit in a row, crossing their legs in identical twists, each practicing a slightly different version of coquettish aloofness: one pouting, one stone-faced, one armed with a prop cigarette. Its masculine corollary might be found some pages earlier, in a shot of a shirtless, tube-socked lothario-in-training. Posing mid-workout, he flexes while holding a barbell and curls his upper lip as if to emphasize the moustache fuzz that has accumulated there, just north of his orthodontia.The adolescence preserved here is Jewish and pure 1970s. (If the tube socks and indoor smoking are not period giveaways, a camper wearing a shirt that says i love the fonz surely is.) Its charm, however, is far more universal. In Sweet’s pools, canteens, and baseball fields, you can almost feel the cling of a swimsuit on wet skin, almost taste the ketchup on a hot dog, almost smell the scent of fresh-cut grass. Sweet has left behind a gorgeous record of American summertime, or at least our collective fantasy of it. It is made all the more tantalizing by the circumstances of the book’s release, at a time when these seasonal rituals have been put on hold.
ArtNews℗What Ecofeminist Artists Learned from Indigenous Cultures℗Louis Bury℗ArtinAmerica℗20/07/2020℗℗Tellingly titled “ecofeminism(s),” the group show now accessible online and in person at Thomas Erben Gallery stresses the ongoing diversity of ecologically centered art by women. Organized by independent curator Monika Fabijanska, the exhibition has some clear similarities to Eleanor Heartney’s recent six-artist roundup for this magazine. The period covered is roughly the same, from the 1970s to the present, and three of the artists overlap: Agnes Denes, Aviva Rahmani, and Betsy Damon. The exhibition and the article both trace a vital artistic lineage that nonetheless, in Heartney’s words, “often fails to register in the mainstream art world.” Yet “ecofeminism(s)” is an encouraging sign that attitudes may be changing in light of global warming, growing feminist self-confidence, and a burgeoning art world emphasis on social justice.In 2018 at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York, Fabijanska curated “The Unheroic Act,” an astute, widely reviewed survey of postwar and contemporary art about sexual violence. Now she once again covers an impressive stretch of aesthetic and historical ground—this time using twenty-six artworks by sixteen female artists. But what stands out is the cohesiveness of her curatorial vision. Particularly through her inclusion of works referencing Indigenous cultures, Fabijanska makes the case that ecofeminist art employs a greater range of formal modes than is commonly acknowledged, from the polemical to the comic to the spiritual.Early ecofeminists such as Rahmani, Denes, Damon, and Ana Mendieta—all represented here by photo-documentation of iconic pieces from the late ’70s and early ’80s—incorporated their own bodies into works about the land, creating a formal repertoire on which subsequent generations of artists have drawn. The absurdist element in contemporary performance-based works by Mary Mattingly, Jessica Segall, and Hanae Utamura—the last of whom, for example, filmed herself mopping a sun-baked desert (Wiping the Sahara Desert, 2010)—underscores the latent absurdism of earlier gestures, such as Rahmani flushing ocean water down a CalArts toilet (Physical Education, 1973) or Denes chaining together trees in an earthy ritual (Rice/Tree/Burial: Chaining the Sacred Forest, 1977/2020). Likewise, the contrast between flashy medium and sober message in Andrea Bowers’s eponymous neon-sign piece, Climate Change Is Real (2017), evidences how a knowing comic streak runs through a genre often misconstrued as overly earnest because of its politics.Designed to facilitate such cross-era and cross-genre comparisons, “ecofeminism(s)” feels a bit like a family reunion—not so small as to be insular, but not so large as to be overwhelming. One great pleasure is seeing lesser-known works situated in kindred context. Bilge Friedlaender’s cluster of nine ochre linen-paper tubes, Cedar Forest (1989), for example, chimes with Damon’s textured cast of a dry riverbed, The Memory of Clean Water (1985), and encapsulates the exhibition’s mood of gritty tenderness. Helène Aylon, who recently died from COVID-19, was better known than Friedlaender but still under-recognized. Her performance The Earth Ambulance (1982)—in which a group of women used an ambulance to “rescue” soil from Strategic Air Command nuclear military bases, then stowed it in pillowcases (“another kind of sack”) and took it along to peace demonstrations—is an iconic fusion of ecological and geopolitical art.While ecofeminist art’s political and intellectual contexts have shifted dramatically over the years (from the Cold War to an overheating planet), one constant is the way practitioners look to Indigenous cultures for alternatives to the capitalist paradigm. Fabijanska avoids the pitfall of romantic idealization, by focusing on land rights concerns as much as on spiritual connections to nature. Carla Maldonado’s film Dystopia of a Jungle City, and the Human of Nature, 2019, examines the struggle to maintain an Indigenous life-style in the face of Amazon deforestation; Eliza Evans’s All the Way to Hell, 2020, is a group action in which the artist proposes to sell the mineral rights to three acres of her land to 1,000 disparate individuals, thus creating a bureaucratic snafu meant to inhibit oil and gas extraction on the site. Drawing on Indigenous visual idioms, Mendieta and Cecilia Vicuña have demonstrated humble, lifelong commitments to the cultures they portray. But it’s Sonya Kelliher-Combs’s Mark, Polar Bear (2019), an American flag bonded with polar bear fur in gel medium, that bids to supplant Jasper Johns’s encaustic flag in the country’s symbolic self-imagination. Inspired by her Iñupiaq and Athabasca ancestors’ use of animal pelts and membranes, Kelliher-Combs’s fuzzy, almost indecipherable flag is, like the exhibition itself, just the right blend of familiar and strange.
ArtNews℗Aki Onda’s New Record Uses Radio to Channel the Ghost of Nam June Paik℗Max Pearl℗ArtinAmerica℗15/07/2020℗℗The word “séance” tends to conjure an image of Belle Époque spiritualists: wealthy eccentrics holding hands around a drawing-room table in some drafty old mansion, while a medium possessing the gift—or curse—of paranormal perception converses with the dead through a system of table-knocks. Séances are a key element of sound artist Aki Onda’s recent work, but he doesn't need a haunted house or a medium to make contact with the world beyond: all he needs is a radio antenna. For his new album, Nam June’s Spirit Was Speaking to Me (Recital, 2020), Onda recorded radio transmissions to produce abstract works of audio collage that, he says, contain the voice of the late South Korean artist Nam June Paik. The resulting four-track LP is compelling as a kind of parapsychological thought experiment, but also stands on its own as a work of richly textured minimalist music.Onda, who was born in Japan and lives in New York, has been experimenting with found sound since the late 1990s. He is perhaps best known for the ongoing project “Cassette Memories” (2004–), a series of performances in which he manipulates the playback of cassette tapes drawn from an archive of field recordings that he calls his “sound diary.” As Onda describes in the album booklet for Nam June’s Spirit Was Speaking to Me, he first made contact with Paik in 2010, after wandering around the Nam June Paik Art Center in Seoul, taking in the institution’s vast collection of Paik's art and ephemera. That night in his hotel room, scanning the radio dial with a handheld receiver, Onda heard a muffled voice emerge through the storm of signals. He clicked record on the attached tape deck, and the next twenty minutes of raw field recording became the basis of his composition “Seoul (2010),” with little to no subsequent editing. Over the next four years, he held what he called “séances” like this wherever he travelled, ultimately using audio from Cologne, Warsaw, and Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, for the other three album tracks.Onda's homage to Paik is twofold, channeling both his disembodied voice and his artistic method. Paik, who died in 2006, said his work with televisions and electronic transmissions was influenced by Korea’s Mudang shamans, who perform rituals with symbolic items like swords and fruits to mediate between the living and the dead. Artists, he suggested, are like shamans in that they open portals between the world of the real and the world of representation, giving form to the ethereal. Paik drew on Mudang shamanism for a 1990 performance in Seoul, A Pas de Loup, in which he summoned Joseph Beuys’s spirit by staging a traditional Korean “kut” rite: drumming, dancing, and singing to an altar full of objects that symbolized the German artist, who had died four years prior. Onda’s invocation of Paik’s spirit echoes this performance, but Onda gives it new life by adapting it to the logic of his found-sound process.Radio has long had paranormal associations because of its core technological feature: if the signal is strong enough, a receiver can pick up messages from anywhere. In Nam June's Spirit Was Speaking to Me, Onda plays with these sci-fi and occult connections, suggesting in the album's liner notes that his recordings might even contain “secret broadcasts” from “anonymous radio stations” built for clandestine research or espionage. He takes this as a kind of meta-premise for the project, expressing the idea of spiritual communion by seeking out chilling, otherworldly sounds generated by who-knows-what coming from who-knows-where. “Köln (2012)” has a particularly wraithlike quality, with sputtering patterns of white noise that suggest encrypted code, while “Seoul (2010)” is so hypnotic that it’s almost gently dissociative, recalling experiments with mood-altering audio. But the most striking thing about these tracks is how little manipulation was involved in their production: apart from the final mastering stage, they are largely unedited recordings of signals pinging around the atmosphere. All Onda did was pluck them from the ether.
ArtNews℗A Book Nominally about Rubens Offers an Honest Portrait of the Way the Author’s Mind Works—and Sometimes Doesn’t℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗01/07/2020℗℗At some point not too long ago—maybe around 2012, when Book One in Karl Ove Knausgård’s epic, autobiographical series, “My Struggle,” came out in English—the confessional mode became the rule for Anglophone letters, not the exception. If you weren’t baring the goriest details of your id, past, or private life, you were holding back. The pages of little magazines filled with pieces by fretful first-person narrators who smeared their sheepish honesty over whatever their subject happened to be that week. Each new “raw,” “risky” autofiction seemed to risk less than the one before. Eventually, hip, bankable performances of honesty overtook actual honesty, offering writers the same advantages (easy to praise as bravery, hard to criticize without lapsing into ad hominem) but insulating them from the danger of humiliation.In his new book, The Drunken Silenus, Morgan Meis doesn’t dabble in faux honesty. He goes for the real deal, and the book is all the better for it. Although he barely writes about his personal life, The Drunken Silenus is as much of a warts-and-all self-portrait as any the autofiction boom has produced. It’s a portrait of the way his mind works, and occasionally doesn’t work, and as such, it is sometimes very humiliating indeed. The book begins as a close analysis of the titular Rubens painting and ends, 172 pages later, as an analysis of, give or take, everything. Along the way, one finds a speculative character study of Silenus (in Greek mythology, Dionysus’s fat, drunken sidekick); a biographical sketch of Rubens’s father; a reading of Nietzsche’s The Birth of Tragedy, another book that takes Silenus as the jumping-off point; a biographical sketch of Nietzsche; and a long spiel about the madness of war.That this all fits together as well as it does isn’t a triumph of structure or careful reasoning so much as a triumph of tone—a certain erudite, insolent, shallowly deep, deeply shallow tone. Meis doesn’t make points so much as bellow them with varying levels of coherence, and he seems to get a kick out of stretching already questionable analogies within an inch of their lives. Consider the following: “Rubens had learned a lesson that Nietzsche was never quite able to get through his head. It doesn’t matter. It just doesn’t matter where you do it, where you live out your life. If the shit inside is solid then it will never matter. Alas, as we’ve already noted, the shit inside Nietzsche was anything but solid. It was runny.” Isn’t this slightly awful, and rather brilliant?Meis is immune to the demands of The Discourse, happy to write three thousand words on Red Grooms or El Greco for no reason other than that he finds them interesting. He’s happy, by the same token, to admit he’s bored by what everybody else finds interesting—“I give not a crap about your brilliant reading of Camus in light of COVID-19, Essayist,” he wrote a few weeks ago. (Full disclosure: I recently became a columnist for 3 Quarks Daily, the website Meis coedits.) The idea for The Drunken Silenus seems to have come from a decade-old essay on Rubens’s painting, which shows a worse-for-the-wear Silenus staggering forward, surrounded by a motley assortment of revelers who prop the ol’ boozer up. In Silenus, Meis found the embodiment of “the knowledge that life has no meaning, nothing it points to beyond its bare existence.” Actually, Meis found this knowledge embodied in Silenus’s knees. I would go so far as to say that his is the finest aesthetic analysis of knees that I’ve ever read, which probably doesn’t sound like much but means that it’s better than the knee analysis in John Berger’s “The Hals Mystery,” which is another way of saying that it’s high in the running for the best snippet of art criticism I’ve read.It’s not enough for Meis to just go ahead and write about knees—he has to end his snippet with, “It’s all there in the knees,” reminding us, as if we have short-term memory loss, what he’s doing. His style, as he puts it in his book’s preface, is “shamelessly intellectual at times and shamelessly crude at others.” The Drunken Silenus isn’t an expanded version of the Rubens essay so much as a slowly widening orbit around its subject, with crudity and erudition aplenty—“I wanted to create a style that would unfold in spirals rather than in lines,” he writes. His analysis of Rubens’s painting, particularly the strange evocation of space that simultaneously pulls viewers in and pushes them away, is thorough and grounded in careful observation, so that when he first veers away from the facts we’re inclined to follow him into the badlands of wild speculation. We continue to follow not only because he’s a fascinating writer but also because he makes us feel the weight of his mission to confront, crabwise rather than head-on, the awful secret that Silenus is said to have guarded: the best thing that could happen to mortals is to be unborn, and the second-best is to die soon.If there’s a progenitor for this kind of writing, it’s Nietzsche. This is a strange thing to point out, since Meis spends much of The Drunken Silenus insulting Nietzsche. He says The Birth of Tragedy was the only totally worthwhile book Nietzsche ever wrote. He says Nietzsche was full of shit. Mostly, he says Nietzsche was crazy. He calls Nietzsche crazy, or insane, or stark-raving mad at least a dozen times in the book, until it becomes a kind of gangster nickname, like Fat Tony or One-Ball Riley, at once a put-down and a term of endearment.Name-calling, of course, was a Nietzsche trademark, and Meis is never more Nietzschean than when he’s slinging mud at a dead man. He has Nietzsche’s skepticism of progress, on both a historical and an expository level, as well as Nietzsche’s gift for making arguments in brief, brilliant flashes. His ideal form is the compressed, Nietzschean aphorism. Some of these will change your perception of Rubens so utterly that they are likely to seem perfectly obvious in hindsight, like Meis’s observation that in order to understand Silenus, Rubens first had to make a mortal out of him. Other aphorisms work the opposite way, flirting with obviousness from the outset—for instance, “A terrible father can produce a great son or daughter. A great father will produce terrible offspring just as often as not.” To borrow from the comedian John Mulaney, someone else who tells stories in spirals, “Well . . . yeah, that’s how all of life works.”Loose, strange, essayistic books live or die on a single question: are their various parts connected because they actually have something to say to each other, or because the author has forced them together? The clutter of ideas and subjects doesn’t necessarily have to cohere into a thesis, but at some point it should gain enough momentum to turn of its own accord, suggesting something more than what the author uses it to show. Meis achieves this tricky feat, and does so in large part because his book is really about, per Mulaney, how all of life works.How humiliating, to write that last sentence—how pretentious, how arrogant! I can’t even imagine writing a whole book like The Drunken Silenus, but I’m glad Meis did. He’s willing to risk redundancy and pretentiousness, because he knows he has something worth risking them for. For all his casual displays of brilliance, his goal isn’t to introduce readers to stunning new ideas but to remind them of a depressing old idea: existence is long, painful, and pointless, and while art can do a lot to lessen the load, it can’t carry all of it. An unsexy point, which he makes very sexily.
ArtNews℗The Posadism Adventure: A History of the Bizarre Communist Movement that Embraced UFOs and Nuclear War℗Gean Moreno℗ArtinAmerica℗30/06/2020℗℗In the 1960s, the Argentine Trotskyist known as J. Posadas led an idiosyncratic socialist movement that embraced science-fictional ideas about nuclear war, UFOs, and interspecies communication. After his death in 1981, Posadism was virtually forgotten. But a few years ago, memes devoted to this obscure advocate of catastrophic communism began proliferating in leftist corners of social media. In one, a white-haired Posadas dons a pair of Morpheus sunglasses, inviting us to take the “gently glowing green pill.” Another detourns a drawing of ape-to-human evolution, charting a progression from Hegel to Marx to Posadas to, finally, the fully evolved extraterrestrial. Taking the memeification of Posadas as a point of departure, journalist A.M. Gittlitz’s book I Want to Believe: Posadism, UFOS, and Apocalypse Communism looks back at the history of Posadism to explore why this largely discredited movement has elicited so much recent interest. Though the memes adopt a tone of irony and ridicule, Gittlitz senses that they express something more: a desire among young radicals to understand an unqualified, lifelong commitment to a revolutionary project, regardless of how strange the path forward might become. Despite the image of the Posadists as “brainwashed Bolsheviks or socialist Scientologists,” they were sincere in their dedication to class struggle and their certainty that revolution was coming—a belief that today arguably seems no less farfetched than the existence of UFOs.Posadas was the nom de guerre of Homero Cristalli, a working-class militant, who, after an impoverished childhood and a short soccer career, found his place among the haughty Trotskyist intellectuals in Buenos Aires, in the late 1930s. He brought the proletarian experience that they pontificated about, and they brought the books and the theory. He started off as revolutionaries often do, organizing unions, leading strikes, and showing up for the study group, and climbed through the ranks of the Fourth International (an international socialist organization founded by Leon Trotsky and his followers in 1938 as an alternative to the Stalinist Comintern). In 1951, Posadas and the Uruguayan militant Alberto Sendic were put in charge of the Latin American Bureau (BLA), an organization that oversaw all Trotskyist activity in Latin America. Under their leadership, the BLA spearheaded revolutionary actions throughout the continent, organizing cadres involved with the revolution in Cuba, the guerrilla wars in Guatemala, and other uprisings throughout the Americas.By the early 1960s, however, a bizarre turn was afoot. Posadas began to demand excessive discipline from his followers, including austere living conditions and prohibitions on nonreproductive sex, homosexuality, and abortion. He also moved to take leadership of the entire Fourth International, claiming that Third World insurrection now represented the front end of history on the way to a socialist world. Someone like himself, from the Global South and seasoned in struggle, should lead, and the politically stagnant European and North American workers’ movements should follow. Though this might have been a reasonable argument, it was delivered through erratic screeds. In 1962, Posadas and his followers broke with the Fourth International, soon declaring their own rival movement.Posadas adopted a number of extreme positions that seem patently absurd today, chief among them his embrace of nuclear war. He proclaimed that the Soviet Union should preemptively strike the United States, based on the belief that a socialist world order would arise from the radioactive ashes. The logic behind this belief, familiar to any vulgar Marxist, was that history was inevitably unfolding toward communism; a nuclear holocaust would only hasten the transition. He is, however, most notorious for his pronouncements on extraterrestrials. At a 1967 meeting, Posadas delivered a speech in which he discussed UFO sightings and extraterrestrial life, speculating about the existence of beings capable of harnessing “all the energy existing in matter.” Organizations like NASA, he argued, were limited by a capitalist mindset oriented around private property; any species advanced enough to develop the technology for intergalactic travel would necessarily have evolved beyond, or bypassed, capitalism. One day, perhaps, they could be called upon to help resolve struggles on Earth.Gittlitz suggests that the speech was intended primarily to placate Dante Minazzoli, one of Posadas’s closest comrades and a dedicated ufologist, but Posadas’s megalomania still compelled him to disseminate a transcript of the remarks in Posadist publications worldwide, under the title “Flying Saucers, the Process of Matter and Energy, Science, the Revolutionary and Working-Class Struggle, and the Socialist Future of Mankind.” Other unusual claims followed: after the birth of his daughter, Homerita, in 1975, he became preoccupied with strange pedagogical exercises and research into dolphin telepathy. As a result, the Posadists were cast as a space cult seeking contact with aliens, the predominant image of them that we have inherited today. While many of these theories and statements seem ridiculous, Gittlitz situates Posadas’s catastrophism within its historical context, a period marked by the escalating nuclear arms race and the Cuban missile crisis: even Che Guevara said he was willing to embrace the mushroom cloud if it would advance the cause of socialist revolution. Similarly, Posadas’s speech about UFOs coincided with attempts by respected scientists like Carl Sagan to locate and contact other intelligent life forms in our galaxy.As Gittlitz’s research shows, Posadas’s ideas may not have been so out of tune with the historical moment in which he was living, but his movement took on an increasingly cult-like quality. After several months in a Uruguayan prison in the early 1970s, Posadas settled in Italy, organizing a compound for his inner circle to live communally. He eventually expelled veteran militants—including his own wife—and gathered around him young recruits with little organizing or political experience. Another world was coming, Posada began to preach, in which the separation of animate and inanimate worlds, the cosmos and humanity, would be abolished. It would be a world in which human lifespans would be extended, interspecies engagement would be flourish, aliens would make contact, and the need for jokes would disappear.At a time like ours, when the language of revolution has been co-opted by ethnonationalists, political reactionaries, and corporations like Space X and Amazon, what does Posadas offer? His wacky ideas hardly seem useful in combating the impoverishment of our political discourse. But Gittlitz shows that their return to circulation is not without some merit. The revival of Posadas is part of a broader recuperation of “eccentric” figures who were exiled from the history of communism, among them Victor Serge, Alexander Bogdanov, Nikolai Fyodorov, and Hugo Blanco, based in the notion that these discarded figures might offer a way to revitalize the communist project without repeating the debacles of the twentieth century. What we can take from Posadism isn’t a belief in UFOs and core meltdowns, but the lunacy of optimism: the ability to imagine a politics guided by the needs of the weakest among us, a desire for more future and less past, and a willingness to leap into the unknown instead of opting for the shitty sure thing.
ArtNews℗Giorgio Griffa’s 1990s Paintings Possess a Nervous Energy—Much Like the Decade Itself℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗24/06/2020℗℗For the last several years, I’ve felt as though I’m reliving the ’90s. The president, a paunchy Boomer and probable sex criminal, has been impeached but remains hugely popular with his base. Big TV events have included new “Twin Peaks” episodes, old “Friends” episodes, and a miniseries about OJ Simpson. History seems to be coming to an end, though not in the sense that Francis Fukayama meant. There’s another Space Jam in the works.The timing, in short, is just right for “Giorgio Griffa: The 1990s,” the latest in a steady stream of Griffa exhibitions held at Casey Kaplan since 2012, when the gallery staged his first show in New York in four decades. All fourteen of the paintings in this exhibition (which can be seen by appointment), were completed between 1991 and 1999, not that you could tell from a glance—the main points of Griffa’s practice (understated, rhythmic abstraction; acrylic paint; unstretched canvases tacked directly to the walls) have barely changed since he began painting full-time in the late ’60s. But in subtler ways, these works show him consolidating the techniques he developed in the first half of his career and posing new stylistic challenges he’s attacked in the second.As seen in Casey Kaplan’s 2015 exhibition “Giorgio Griffa: The 1970s,” Griffa’s first mature paintings displayed the stylistic roughness and sparseness valued by Arte Povera painters, with whom he shared a dealer, Ileana Sonnabend, and a hometown, Turin, where he still lives and works. More like a family friend than a card-carrying member of the movement, he took what he needed from it and moved on. In the ’80s—the era on which Kaplan’s 2018 Griffa show focused—his style got more exuberant, with the colors ripening and the brushstrokes starting to cover more ground. His ’90s output suggests an odd truce between the previous decades: sparseness and exuberance, underdog and showman. The acrylics are bright but more diluted than before, so that they sink into the canvas instead of resting on top of it. There’s a stronger sense of negative space than in his ’80s work, but not as strong as in his ’70s work.The quintessential ’90s Griffa brushstroke (found in, for instance, Tre linee con arabesco n. 491, from 1992, or Dittico lieve odulaato, from 1996) is a line that starts on one side of the canvas, crawls toward the other without thinning or thickening, and throws in the towel with a few feet, or inches, left to go. It’s been cut short, robbed of its momentum, but you still imagine it pushing on to the edge of the painting and beyond. This is a trickier feat than it seems. I didn’t much care for the smaller canvases in the exhibition—they don’t seem provocatively incomplete so much as slack. Griffa is more precise (just better, actually) when he’s working on a larger scale. In Tre linee con arabesco n. 199, he lets you savor the paint’s progress across six and a half feet of rough, brownish canvas, lets you measure it against the deep creases in the support until it seems as vast and precarious as train tracks through a desert.But in this painting, as in most of Griffa’s best work, the canvas is the first and last thing you notice. It gives the paint a directness and urgency he learned from Arte Povera and has held onto since forging his own path. In the show’s most evocative painting, Polittico arabesco con linee orizzontail (1997), lines and loops join to form a barbed wire fence, and it would be easy to dismiss this as a glib little flourish—so conveniently, self-consciously political that the word “political” appears in the work’s title. But here again, the gravitas of the materials rescues the image, and makes the arabesque seem not slight but suggestive and, yes, political. The paintings in this show are neither as conspicuously principled as Griffa’s early, post-’68 work nor as flashily fun as his ’80s stuff, but they have their own nervous energy. They’re capable of generating a hushed anticipation, hinting at something yet to come, not that this something is necessarily good. All of which is to say, they strike me as very ’90s indeed.
ArtNews℗Shifting Styles and Moral Steadiness Made Philip Guston a Lodestar for Artists Today℗Eleanor Heartney℗ArtinAmerica℗22/06/2020℗℗Harry Cooper, Mark Godfrey, et al., Philip Guston Now, Washington, D.C., National Gallery of Art, and New York, D.A.P., 2020; 280 pages, $60 hardcover.Philip Guston, Poor Richard, Washington, D.C., National Gallery of Art, and New York, D.A.P., 2020; 96 pages, $14.95. “What kind of man am I, sitting at home, reading magazines, going into frustrated fury about everything—and then going into my studio to adjust a red to a blue?” As we hunker in lockdown, chafing at the restrictions imposed by a pandemic whose effects have been magnified by the incompetence of our leaders, this comment by Philip Guston hits a nerve. What should art be when the world seems to be collapsing around us? Is it ethically and morally responsible to try to escape the madness by withdrawing into the solace of aesthetic pleasure?When Guston spoke these words, he was nearing the end of a life that had spanned some of the most tumultuous events of the twentieth century, among them the Depression, the Second World War, the Holocaust, the struggle for civil rights, the debacle of the Vietnam War, and the duplicity of Richard Nixon. His response to these events was full of rich ambiguity. He famously careened from early Social Realist figuration to Abstract Expressionism and finally to the darkly humorous Neo-Expressionism that earned him the enmity of his contemporaries and the passionate embrace of younger artists. Guston was never simply a political commentator, but his work is permeated with a sense of unease rooted in an awareness of his own and society’s complicity in evil. Since his death in 1980, his late paintings, with their jumbles of shoes and bottles, bare bulbs, bloodshot eyeballs, and cigarette-smoking Klansmen have continued to electrify and influence successive generations of artists.Philip Guston Now is the catalogue for a traveling exhibition that was supposed to open at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., this summer. Though that may yet happen, what we have for now is a lushly illustrated book with scholarly essays on various aspects of Guston’s work by that exhibition’s four curators. It is accompanied by Poor Richard, a slim volume containing a selection of Guston’s satirical drawings of Richard Nixon, created in the summer of 1971, two years before Watergate; this publication honors the promised gift of the Poor Richard drawings by the Guston Foundation to the National Gallery of Art. Together, the two books emphasize Guston’s intense involvement in the world outside the studio. In the main catalogue, the National Gallery’s Harry Cooper provides an overview that stresses the political undercurrents in the work and the thematic continuities between the two figurative periods. Mark Godfrey, from Tate Modern in London, teases out the Jewish themes that permeate the late work. Alison de Lima Greene, from the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston, focuses on the early work, discovering an ongoing preoccupation with masks that extends beyond the Klan figures to images of clowns, children, musicians, and commedia dell’arte characters. And Kate Nesin of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, provides a more formal analysis, with a detailed study of the role of space and horizons in the artist’s late work.Poor Richard, meanwhile, lets the work speak for itself. In a brief afterward, Cooper—the sole commentator in this volume—notes that Guston arranged these seventy-three (out of 164) Nixon drawings to evoke a wordless narrative in the manner of a graphic novel. The book introduces the future president as a young boy, sleepless in bed as a belching freight train passes his window. The subsequent pages take him to adulthood and his political career, touching on real events like Nixon’s overtures to China and his role as part of an unholy trinity that included Henry Kissinger and Vice President Spiro Agnew. Among the images, which are included separately in the exhibition, are fantasy tableaux showing the trio outfitted in Klan hoods or peering into bleak landscapes scattered with the rubble and artifacts familiar from Guston’s late paintings. As Cooper remarks, the similarities suggest Guston’s equation of the self-identified Artist in the paintings with the darker aspects of Nixon’s soul.But as Cooper argues in the main catalogue, “perhaps the best commentary has been the work of other artists, who picked up on Guston’s late work long before most critics, curators, and collectors did.” In keeping with this idea, interspersed within the curators’ texts are statements by ten contemporary artists who reflect on Guston’s diverse output in light of their own concerns. These practitioners offer some of the most thought-provoking takes on the midcentury artist and his creations.Trenton Doyle Hancock and Glenn Ligon zero in on the Klan theme that appears first in the 1930s and then reappears in the 1970s. Hancock offers a perceptive analysis of an early drawing for a lost 1930 painting called Conspirators; the drawing foregrounds an apparently dejected Klansman as a group of his cohorts huddle under a lynching and a crucifixion. Hancock notes that this work inspired his own painting narrative, which pits his alter ego against a threatening Klan figure. He remarks, “Guston often spoke of ‘ghosts’ in the studio, voices of predecessors requiring exorcisms. At some point you have to stop the chase and confront those voices.” Ligon expands on the same 1930 Klan figures and their later reincarnations. He contends that this motif enabled Guston to “dive into the muck and mire of the American experience, allowing him to tell the truth of what it meant to be a citizen reckoning with a particularly turbulent moment in the nation’s history.”Other artists concentrate on the more subjective qualities in Guston’s work. Amy Sillman waxes lyrical about the quotidian imagery in late Guston’s self-portraits, remarking, “the worried guy in Guston’s pictures, smoking, eating, and watching, is a guy who both reveals and repudiates time; doubt regenerates him.” David Reed recalls the advice Guston proffered his art class during a student crit: “To live in the world as painters, we had to go into the life we were living and find what disturbed us.” Dana Schutz echoes those sentiments in an assessment that stresses Guston’s empathy even for the most unredeemable of his characters: “More than any other artist, Guston renders the messy contradictions and heartbreaking ambiguity of what it is to be a person.”For other contributors, Guston’s work offers affirmations of their own often idiosyncratic paths. William Kentridge analyzes Guston’s hooded self-portrait as “an example of the work of the studio, which is to take the fragments of the world, rearrange and transform them, and send them back out into the world (here as a painting).” Art Spiegelman notes how Guston’s willingness to cross the high/low divide empowered a generation of comics artists like himself. Both Tacita Dean and Rirkrit Tiravanija celebrate the freedom that erupted when Guston turned his back on the approval of his peers. Dean celebrates his embrace of the company of writers and cartoonists, while Tiravanija admits to being more interested in the stories of Guston’s rejection by the art world than in his formal innovations. And Peter Fischli confesses that his fascination with Guston stems from the great difference in their world views: Guston, as a modernist, embraced the drama of the artist’s struggle in the studio; Fischli, as a postmodernist, implies the absurdity of that struggle.These commentaries help us see why Guston persists when the work of so many of his contemporaries is now tinged with the musty odor of art history. Guston’s enduring appeal rests in the permissions he offers artists. He encourages them to drastically change their work in midstream, to examine their personal relationship to evil, to embrace discredited styles and genres, and to accept and even revel in their own ambivalence about the meaning of art. Their responses vindicate the renegade modernist who declared in 1970: “I got sick and tired of all that Purity! Wanted to tell Stories!”
ArtNews℗Carceral Aesthetics: The Conditions of Making Art in Prison℗Jackie Wang℗ArtinAmerica℗18/06/2020℗℗As hundreds of thousands of people take to the streets demanding the defunding of police departments, the end of anti-Black racism, and justice for George Floyd, Tony McDade, Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery, and Rayshard Brooks, it is important to remember that the seeds of the police and prison abolitionist movement were planted long ago, as far back as the struggle to end slavery. In recent decades, Black women have tended these seeds by developing the conceptual framework for the movement (think Angela Davis, Ruth Wilson Gilmore, and Mariame Kaba) and by performing the care labor of holding together communities that have been convulsed by mass incarceration.Nicole R. Fleetwood’s new book, Marking Time: Art in the Age of Mass Incarceration, centers on the care labor and everyday activism of Black women who do the work of abolition by maintaining relationships with family members and loved ones who are incarcerated, including the women in her own family who showed up for the young Black men who had been sent to prison. The book, whose release was scheduled to coincide with a MoMA PS1 exhibition that has been postponed, is a thoroughly researched and heartbreakingly personal look at prison art and the broader visual culture of incarceration, and the way art becomes a mode of relationality among prisoners who use it to combat the imposed isolation of imprisonment. Rather than analyzing prison art as “outsider art” or as a form of therapy, Fleetwood uses the term “carceral aesthetics” to describe how penal space, time, and matter shape the production of the art she examines.The peculiarities of the institutional context of the prison are familiar to those who have a loved one in prison or have been in prison themselves. Incarcerated artists create under conditions of extreme duress. Their supplies are limited to what they can purchase through the commissary or access through arts programs (which, if available at all, are usually restricted to prisoners with no disciplinary records). Certain paint colors are banned (due to their chemical composition) and the kinds of items prisoners can possess are strictly regulated. Prisoners are always being watched. The content of the work they produce, what they can say to outside collaborators, and how they circulate their work are censored or mediated by prison administrators. And yet they still create art—often compulsively, sometimes using contraband materials or repurposed trash. Art can also be a means of survival for prisoners who trade it for food, services, or commissary items.What I especially appreciate in Fleetwood’s book, in addition to the attention she pays to the material dimension of carceral aesthetics, is her insistence on examining how power structures both the conditions under which incarcerated artists work and how their work circulates. She examines the power dynamics between established artists on the outside who seek to collaborate with prisoners (a prison administrator recounts that one incarcerated person who had been asked to participate in such a collaboration responded, “They are using us”), the state’s punitive deployment of mug shots, and even the power imbalance between incarcerated artists and well-meaning prison arts programmers. While nonprofits might try to quantify the salutary effects of prison arts programs to convince funders that art facilitates “rehabilitation,” Fleetwood is keenly aware that this model pathologizes prisoners and leads to an individual-based, rather than a structural, understanding of the question of why people end up in prison. She traces the history of prison arts programs back to their revolutionary roots, starting with the collaborations between Black arts organizations and prisoners in the late 1960s and early 1970s, particularly in the immediate aftermath of the 1971 Attica prison uprising. Groups like the Black Emergency Cultural Coalition—which was founded in New York in 1969 by Benny Andrews, Romare Bearden, Faith Ringgold, Camille Billops, Norman Lewis, and others—pivoted toward organizing prisoners in the 1970s and engaged in art collaborations with prisoners as part of their broader struggle. Yet many of these programs collapsed after Ronald Reagan banned prison arts programs from accessing NEA grants.Woven throughout the book are striking illustrations of the work of incarcerated and formerly incarcerated artists, and, occasionally, art by non-incarcerated artists that engages the subject of prisons. The works are wide-ranging: Gil Batle’s Sanctuary (2014) is an ostrich eggshell into which brutal scenes of prison life are intricately carved; Dean Gillispie’s Spiz’s Dinette (1996) is a miniature model of an Airstream diner made from materials including notebook backs, cigarette foil, and popsicle sticks; Tyra Patterson uses hair, cloth, glitter, and other materials to make three-dimensional portraits of incarcerated women, accompanied by symbols from nature. Some of the works are massive, such as Jesse Krimes’s fifteen-by-forty-foot work Apokaluptein 16389067 (2010–13), which consists of images transferred onto prison bedsheets and was assembled only after Krimes was released from prison. Other works are more muted and seem to emanate from a place of deep melancholia, such as Billy Sell’s haunting black-and-white self-portrait made the year before he was found dead in his cell while being held in long-term solitary confinement (his death was ruled a suicide, but activists have questioned this conclusion).The first four chapters of the book cover an impressive breadth of topics, including the racist origins of Kantian aesthetics, “mushfake” (makeshift tools and objects made by prisoners, such as a tattoo gun created out of an electric razor and other items), photographs of prisoners done in the social documentary mode, and the aesthetic and symbolic functions of portraits produced by prisoners. The final three chapters, which address collaborative art in prison, art produced in solitary confinement, and vernacular prison photography, hit hard on an emotional level. In the last chapter, Fleetwood includes images of herself and her family members posing with her cousins Allen and De’Andre in prison. She reflects on these photographs and on the millions of prison photos that circulate between incarcerated people and their loved ones: the pain of noticing an expression of resignation, or seeing the incarcerated person and yourself age in the images.As someone whose brother has been incarcerated for sixteen years (of a life sentence that was commuted to forty years), I found this chapter deeply moving. When Fleetwood describes her dread upon receiving pictures from her incarcerated cousin Allen because she found them so emotionally overwhelming, that response felt familiar. While I was reading this book, my brother mailed me a thick envelope of pictures. He had just been put in Close Management, was transferred to a higher security prison for contraband found in a windowsill (which he insists wasn’t his), and faced new restrictions on what he could possess, prompting him to send his collection of photographs to me. I felt deeply saddened by the photographs from our childhood. There was one of him posing with our childhood dog, another of me graduating from high school, selfies of my adolescent best friend and others from our high school, photos of my Dad’s car, and some photos I must have sent him over a decade ago of a trip to Italy. What does a photograph mean to someone who is incarcerated?That is a question taken up in an ongoing program that Fleetwood discusses, Photo Requests from Solitary, which was initiated by a grassroots coalition that fought to shut down Tamms Correctional Center, a supermax prison in Illinois that did eventually close, in 2013. People held in long-term solitary confinement can request photos of anything—real or imagined—that non-incarcerated volunteers then take or digitally produce for them. As Fleetwood notes, this program enables the co-construction of a “collective imaginary” beyond the brutal imaginary of cages. Roberto, writing from Tamms, asked for “an alternate background from the IDOC [Illinois Department of Corrections] picture. I have no pictures of myself to give my friends and family. . . . If you can place my picture on another background. Nothing too much please. Something simple like a blue sky with clouds or a sunset in the distance.” While prisoners have been largely excluded from public life, the art and images Fleetwood highlights function as material traces of the disappeared, who, through acts of creation, refuse to be rendered invisible.
ArtNews℗An Exhibition of Works on Paper Shows the Power of an Old-Fashioned Medium℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗10/06/2020℗℗For most of its history, paper was a disobedient medium. It was made from discarded scraps of hemp, cotton, flax, and bark—in a word, garbage—that had to be boiled into pulp and bullied flat by heavy stones. Different kinds of fiber would harden at different speeds, creating hills and valleys, dark patches, and shriveled corners, so that each piece, in its own unique way, refused to be perfectly straight or pale or smooth. Paper wasn’t a neutral host for art but a stubborn work of art in its own right.At a glance, the theme of Michael Rosenfeld’s current exhibition can seem like a hazy curatorial gimmick. The sixty-three artists, represented here by ninety-seven works, have two and only two things in common: they lived in the twentieth century, and they used paper. By surrendering to the medium’s primordial powers, however, the show—which can be seen by appointment—ends up feeling surprisingly cohesive. Even in an age of 8½ by 11, it suggests, making art out of fragile, resilient paper in some sense means making art about fragility and resilience in the real world. If this sounds like a case of forcing politics where it doesn’t belong, just listen to Robert Hughes, nobody’s idea of an activist-critic. “Drawing,” he said in 2004, “never dies, it holds on by the skin of its teeth.” Small wonder that some of the greatest modern makers of drawings and other works on paper were disenfranchised—people of color and Jews and homosexuals and women and immigrants who knew the sting of erasure and tried to soothe it by honoring, or simply acknowledging, their own warm, imperfect beings. The exhibition’s name: “Paper Power.”What kind of power? Trying to squeeze a show this big into one sentence is a fool’s errand, but go ahead and call me a fool, then. Working with paper, it seems to me, enabled these artists to produce lean, hardheaded art that was assertive but aware of its own vulnerability, victorious but never quite triumphant, always dangling on the edge of nothingness—i.e., art that was tonally inclined toward themes of oppression and struggle. Charles White’s Leadbelly (1975) has a frankness that his social realist frescoes lack: the work, a handsome blend of oil wash and graphite, depicts a shackled musician who seems to push uneasily back on the emptiness around him. Something similar happens in Norman Lewis’s abstract ink drawings—his pen strokes are a little too far from the sides of the paper, huddled a little too close together, fighting to exist. The exhibition brings out these qualities by rhyming Lewis’s works with those by Lee Lozano and Elie Nadelman, so that even when you turn to a brighter, denser 1962 painting by Alma Thomas, your eyes are drawn to the fraying edges of the sheet and the areas in which the naked ground peeks through the color fields.Some other standout artists here (Paul Cadmus, Jared French, Pavel Tchelitchew) were featured in “The Young and Evil,” an exhibition that made a splash at David Zwirner last year and seems related to “Paper Power” in more than a couple ways. The Zwirner show made a case for the radicalism of queer artists who worked in oddly old-fashioned mediums like silverpoint. “Paper Power” broadens this thesis without weakening it. Perhaps paper, the most old-fashioned medium there is, holds a paradoxical appeal for all downtrodden people in want of radical change. Thin and fragile, never more than a tug away from tearing, it’s still here, somehow. To cover it in ink or wax or graphite is to insist, in your own modest way, “So am I.”
ArtNews℗Josh Kline Is Here to Give You Some Alternative Facts℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗09/06/2020℗℗Zoom is generally no way to view art, but for Josh Kline’s exhibition “Alternative Facts,” at Various Small Fires in Seoul, it was oddly fitting. I saw the show with a dozen other writers during a Zoom walk-through given by the gallery’s director. Through our screens, we viewed six new sculptures (all 2020) that themselves related to screens: American or Blue Lives Matter flags that had been soaked in resin, cast in the shape of flat-screen televisions, and mounted on the walls. There were surely details that the compressed video stream left behind, such as the nature of the stains dirtying some of the nylon fabric. But the message of this exhibition featuring TVs made out of twisted flags and titled after Kellyanne Conway’s infamous characterization of her lies came through just fine: conservative media in the United States has become inextricable from right-wing agendas that are deforming American society.Kline’s sculptures critique the values of a country that conflates freedom and property ownership, that prioritizes the ability to have your own version of the truth delivered to you on an imported television that you bought at half-price on Black Friday. (For his casts, Kline used televisions made by Korea’s Samsung and LG, the most popular TV brands in the United States.) The Stars and Stripes sculptures belonged to a series whose title, like the exhibition’s, is an oxymoron borrowed from the contemporary public sphere: “Reality Television.” The single work incorporating Blue Lives Matter flags—a variant on the American flag that is meant to honor the police and that insults the Black Lives Matter movement—was from a series called “Fox and Friends,” after the daily morning show on the nation’s preferred network for mainlining right-wing propaganda into the eyeballs.Kline’s works inevitably bring to mind Jasper Johns’s flags. In Reality Television 16, the stars and bars of a flag press through passages of off-white pigment, the piece recalling Johns’s White Flag (1955). But the art historical evocation doesn’t complicate these works in any real way. In the end, Kline’s sculptures are not about subtlety: they adopt the same blunt, propagandistic tone as the culture they critique. Indeed, the gallery director noted that the pigment in the above-mentioned piece was meant to represent not Johns’s encaustic but the skin color of Fox’s primary viewership. This formal invocation of whiteness seems gratuitous, since the flag itself represents a country built on white values. While the work’s low intellectual register seems intended as a jab at its right-wing subject, giving exhibition viewers a jolt of superiority, it also allows Kline to avoid offering any specific critique of our country’s racist history.This was a quick, brutal exhibition—made of screens, by screens, and for screens. Like Johns’s flags, Kline’s “Reality Television” and “Fox and Friends” works at once depict flags and are flags. Similarly, they both portray screens and are screens, lampoon propaganda and are propaganda. The sculptures are compact metaphors for the sort of histrionic arguments conservative pundits favor. And as with a Fox broadcast or a Trump speech, you don’t need to read between their lines. They say the nasty parts out loud.
ArtNews℗A History of Architects Mistaking Design for Politics℗Emily Watlington℗ArtinAmerica℗07/06/2020℗℗The World as an Architectural Project, recently published by MIT Press, surveys fifty projects, most of them ambitious in a troubling way. Few are realized buildings; the majority are books, paintings, dissertations, maps, urban schemas, or proposals for “global” building typologies. MIT architecture dean Hashim Sarkis, curator of the 2021 Venice Architecture Biennale, was the book’s “principal investigator,” and discusses the projects along with fellow faculty members Roi Salgueiro Barrio and Gabriel Kozlowski. The architects they focus on see themselves, by and large, as much more than designers of buildings: they are self-styled builders of worlds.This grandiose view of the discipline is common. It’s often taught in schools, where students are prompted to propose housing complexes intended to ameliorate various real-world refugee crises. When they graduate and get jobs at firms, they are often disappointed to find that their wealthy clients are not interested in such altruistic projects, but instead want to commission luxury condos or, at best, a museum. Architecture without clients would be architecture without buildings—political and monetary support is necessary to realize any major proposal today. So while a select few projects represented in the book—which is laid out as a series of fifty individual entries sandwiched between an introduction and a conclusion—could actually be engineered, that does not mean they are buildable. Architects certainly should not be forbidden to dream, but after reading nearly six hundred pages about unrealized and unrealizable structural projects that attempt to solve world-scale problems, one inevitably comes to feel that building is simply not the right medium for resolving such huge issues.The authors are critical of the projects they survey. They note that many architects wind up “uncritically accepting or reinforcing . . . projects of domination,” but not that this fault seems inherent to world-scale ambitions. Nor do they say why, then, readers should study such projects, only that “taking architecture to its most ambitious extreme . . . becomes the most demanding form of interrogation,” and that this approach should “inform a critique of the methods of intervening in the world our discipline has endorsed.” Since they do not offer their own critique of the discipline, but rather endeavor to “inform” readers, here’s mine.Architecture can indeed play a significant role in politics. For instance, colonizers, such as the British in India, have often borrowed local vernacular motifs in order to make their presence seem less jarring, more mundane. In such situations, the shape of a window has serious political implications. But many architects, in the book and in the world, seem to think the connection between architecture and politics means that the former can replace the latter altogether. Some are deliberately irreverent toward cultural or geographic styles, materials, and values, insisting that certain forms can and should be replicated anywhere, overriding or subordinating what was there before. The authors consider Zaha Hadid’s work global in nature simply because her biomorphic buildings show up worldwide. They describe Le Corbusier as part of a group of right-wing, antigovernment intellectuals who saw world-building through architecture as a means to supplant politicians. This unwavering faith in building is preposterous in the face of today’s extremely uneven wealth distribution, a condition exacerbated by the real estate market. Since there are more vacant homes than homeless people in the United States, clearly it’s not new buildings that we need, but new politics.The most interesting projects in the book are the handful that express skepticism about what, exactly, buildings can do. While many of the architects believe they can build new worlds, a few hold the more modest view that buildings reflect the values of the cultures in which they are created—as the Italian collective Archizoom chose to demonstrate by negative example. Illustrating a familiar dystopia and providing a warning about the ways in which architects serve capitalism, their 1969–2001 No-Stop City project features a series of drawings, tableaux, and photomontages that include depictions of depressingly homogenous locales, like parking lots and shopping malls, surrounded by mirrors that make them look endlessly expansive. A few architects are skeptical that new construction could ever be justified during an ecological crisis. In 1928, Russian environmentalist architect Georgii Krutikov proposed creating “aerial settlements”—vertical apartment buildings stacked atop circular spacecraft—in hopes that nature might recover in the absence of Homo sapiens. The volume’s entry on Austrian architect Raimund Abraham quotes a passage from his “In Anticipation of Architecture: Fragmentary Notes,” in which he contemplates how construction always entails destruction: “while you build the wall / you shall destroy the stones / while your eyes long for the window / you shall destroy the wall.” In an effort to minimize the presence of architecture, Buckminster Fuller built what he called Dymaxion Houses (1933): round structures weighing only three tons (rather than the typical home’s one hundred). He held that architecture should “sublimate” itself, providing comfortable but simple shelter from rain and harsh climates, especially as telecommunications promised to alter our relationship to space and time. The pie-in-the-sky 1959–62 Air Architecture scheme by France’s Yves Klein and Claude Parent goes one step further: they proposed applying indoor climate-control technology outdoors, obviating the need for shelter entirely: the only infrastructure in their proposal is an elevated highway that also supports the machinery.This book makes it clear—abundantly, though inadvertently—that new construction is rarely the solution to society’s problems. But the authors avoid this discomforting fact by neglecting to come to much of a conclusion at all. Rather than spelling out lessons learned by comparing the projects that fill the volume, they wrap up their survey with a handful of vague wishes for the future of the discipline, loosely outlining principles like “non-anthropocentric architecture” and “sources of equity” in a mere seven pages. In the entry on Archizoom, the collective’s founder, Andrea Branzi, contends that “architecture has never confronted the theme of managing its own death while remaining alive, as all the other twentieth-century disciplines have.” He cites Mark Rothko’s paintings and John Cage’s music. This, Branzi argues, “is why [the field] has lagged behind.” Instead of helping the discipline to catch up, the authors comment that architecture is “condemned to optimism and seeks to construct positive worlds.” It’s not surprising that Sarkis and his collaborators stop short of confronting their subject’s death: all three are historians or curators who also maintain their own building practices, as is common in the field. Addressing architecture’s mortality would mean confronting their own limitations. But can architecture chart a middle ground between Le Corbusier’s modernist utopias and Archizoom’s doom and gloom? If so, it’s through projects humbler than those found in The World as an Architectural Project.
ArtNews℗A Show of Japanese “Expanded” Cinema Neglects to Include the Works’ Expansive Parts℗Emily Watlington℗ArtinAmerica℗03/06/2020℗℗“More than Cinema,” at Pioneer Works in Brooklyn, centers on four pieces from the 1960s and ’70s by Japanese filmmakers Motoharu Jonouchi (b. 1935) and Keiichi Tanaami (b. 1936) that the show’s curators—Collaborative Cataloging Japan (CCJ) director Ann Adachi-Tasch and film scholars Go Hirasawa and Julian Ross—present as examples of expanded cinema. Coined by American filmmaker Stan VanDerBeek in the mid-1960s, the term “expanded cinema” refers to projects in which artist-filmmakers experiment with the spatial relationship between viewer and screen(s). In their original forms, the works represented in the exhibition did fit that description—they incorporated live soundtracks or performances and were shown in unconventional venues like the Tokyo discotheque Killer Joe’s. But at Pioneer Works, unfortunately, they are stripped of the components that made them expanded, and screened simply as one- or two-channel films.The show, which opened before the coronavirus shutdown and will be on view again for a period after the institution reopens, begins with Jonouchi’s works. Document 6.15 (1961–62) features silent footage he shot from the crowd of a protest against the 1960 US-Japan Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security and the continued presence of US troops in Okinawa. Originally, this footage was only one component of a performance that Jonouchi staged as a memorial ceremony for a student killed at the protest, Michiko Kanba, and that involved slides, balloons, and a two-channel soundtrack featuring voices from opposing Japanese political parties. Rather than attempting to re-create this intermedia event, the show gives viewers only a work suggesting cinema verité.Jonouchi’s Hi Red Center Shelter Plan (1964) is an eighteen-minute black-and-white silent film in which artists including Nam June Paik, Yoko Ono, and members of the Japanese collective Hi-Red Center mock Cold War fears by pretending to design bomb shelters custom-fit to their bodies. The silly, deadpan film shows the artists diligently measuring one another using measuring tapes. A slightly different version, only two minutes longer, played on a small screen next to Jonouchi’s master cut, incorporating additional footage the curators had discovered. Japanese pamphlets and contemporaneous copies of the Japanese art magazine Bijutsu Techo populate a corner of the gallery—ostensibly to provide historical context, but they haven’t been translated, and so will be unreadable to most of the exhibition’s visitors. A similarly unwelcoming gesture is that no seating has been provided in this show featuring hours of footage.This gets to the crux of the problem: the unique opportunity to see obscure, newly restored works has been conceived more as a presentation of research findings than as a situation conducive to viewing artwork. It’s always difficult to represent underground works adequately in an institutional context, and the curators’ endeavor to find, preserve, and digitize the films is no doubt significant. Still, the exhibition feels like a visit to the archive instead of a presentation capturing the original sense of the works. The show actually appears more at home on CCJ’s website, where the curators’ essays provide historical context and the materials make no pretense of approximating an art experience.In Tanaami’s 4 Eyes (1975), psychedelic imagery—mostly trippy dots and two-toned footage of women—plays on two channels that roughly mirror each other, though one is made deliberately to lag a few seconds behind the other. In a twenty-five minute video interview accompanying the work, Tanaami says that 4 Eyes was an effort to make film the way he makes graphic design—the artist is best known for illustrations featuring cartoonish motifs—and that his moving-image works never came out the way he wanted them to, due largely to the limits of the technology at the time. His other work on view, Human Events (1975), features footage of butoh dancer Kazuko Tsujimura’s body in extreme close-up. The work was initially a six-channel installation that served as a backdrop for a performance by Tsujimura in which the projections cast her body in silhouette, but here it is only a two-channel film projected at modest scale. Although we’ve made significant technological advances in the half-century since Tanaami made Human Events, we are shown a version that’s even further from what he would have intended.
ArtNews℗Sam McKinniss’s Child Star Portraits Mine the Culture of the 1990s℗Rachel Wetzler℗ArtinAmerica℗01/06/2020℗℗Sam McKinniss is among the greatest colorists of his generation, as would have been clear to anyone who saw his 2016 exhibition at Team, “Egyptian Violet.” The show’s thematic anchor was the titular color, a rich, glamorous purple that appeared prominently in the paintings on view. The works were based on an eclectic mix of images McKinniss found online: Lil’ Kim in seashell pasties at the 1998 VMAs; Laura Dern as Sandy Williams in Blue Velvet; a poster for the 1996 movie Flipper, about a friendly pet dolphin; the cover of Prince’s album Purple Rain; floral still lifes by Henri Fantin-Latour. Foregrounding the royal color linking the source images, McKinniss’s paintings drew out a majestic quality latent in each. The Flipper poster is kitsch, but McKinniss’s painting based on it isn’t: exaggerating the shimmering arc of bubbles trailing the dolphin and deepening the hue of the water, the work has all the gravity of a court portrait. This is a technical feat—a less skilled painter wouldn’t have pulled it off—but also a matter of attitude: McKinniss does not so much level distinctions between high and low as refuse to acknowledge them in the first place, starting from the presumption that the only categories of image that exist are interesting/not interesting, beautiful/not beautiful.Unlike the thrilling grab bag of “Egyptian Violet,” the paintings in McKinniss’s most recent exhibition, “Jonathan Taylor Thomas” at—wait for it—JTT, were more obviously connected by a theme: child stars. Based on paparazzi shots, movie promos, and magazine images, the paintings portrayed such celebrities in an ABC palette of primary colors, as if to emphasize the subjects’ suspension in a state of permanent adolescence. Hanging alone on one wall like an icon painting was JTT (2020), a small, closely cropped depiction of a baby-faced Thomas grinning in the pages of a ’90s teen mag, the oversaturated orange glow of his skin contrasting sharply with the electric blue ground. Nearby, Aaliyah (2020) captured the singer posing sassily in head-to-toe Tommy Hilfiger, hovering over a field of modulated white that loosely suggested light bouncing off a magazine page. Lindsay Lohan appeared three times: as the long-lost twin protagonists of Disney’s 1998 Parent Trap remake in Hallie and Annie (2020), and as herself circa 2012 in Lindsay (2020), caught by a paparazzo grimacing behind the wheel of her car with smeared mascara and a cigarette in hand. In Serena (2019), Serena Williams lunges for a tennis ball with balletic grace, the clay court portrayed as a depthless field of deep red.Each painting was a collection of exquisite, painterly details, from Williams’s satiny spandex to Lohan’s nicotine-stained teeth. But the source images never quite receded from view, as they do with McKinniss’s best work. Too often the paintings seemed merely like inexact copies. When I looked at them, I couldn’t help but see the original images in my head, and the comparison didn’t always work in the paintings’ favor. In The Olsens (2019), for instance, McKinniss perfectly captures Mary Kate and Ashley’s icy mien as they sit front row at a fashion show in severe black pantsuits, but not their faces, which would matter less if their recognizability—their status as quintessential child stars whose every move since infancy has been documented—wasn’t the point here. Surprisingly, the show’s most captivating work was not a painting but a grid of fifty small colored pencil drawings lining one wall, with sketch-like color studies interspersed among pictures of flowers, animals, and pop cultural icons: Macaulay Culkin clutching his cheeks in Home Alone, the baby floating in a pool on the cover of Nirvana’s Nevermind, Kim Kardashian wailing, Uncle Jesse cradling little Michelle Tanner. The drawings, collectively titled Wild America (2020), appeared less copied than conjured from memory, like fragments of a generational imagination.
ArtNews℗John Cage, Man of Music—and Mushrooms℗Max Pearl℗ArtinAmerica℗31/05/2020℗℗In February 1959, John Cage appeared on the Italian television program “Lascia o Raddoppio” (Double or Nothing), a popular game show on which contestants had to answer obscure trivia questions about a subject of their choice: in Cage’s case, not music or art, but mushrooms. In the final round, he was asked to list the twenty-four white-spored agarics contained in the field guide Studies of American Fungi. Not only did Cage name all twenty-four correctly, he named them in alphabetical order, taking home a prize of five million lire (around eight thousand dollars). With the winnings, he purchased a Volkswagen bus for his partner, the choreographer Merce Cunningham, and a piano for his home in Stony Point, New York.Such delightful anecdotes abound in John Cage: A Mycological Foray—Variations on Mushrooms, a two-volume monograph published by Atelier Éditions exploring the experimental composer’s fascination with fungi. Cage began foraging for survival during the Great Depression, when he was a broke and hungry music student living in a shack on the California coast. Later, though he was no longer penniless, he continued as a hobby: in 1959, he taught a mushroom identification class at the New School for Social Research alongside his courses in musical composition, and in the 1960s, resurrected the defunct New York Mycological Society, a group of mushroom enthusiasts that met for foraging excursions and exchanged recipes.In the book’s first volume, an essay by writer Kingston Trinder about the impact of mushroom-hunting on Cage's philosophy is interspersed with archival photographs and relevant excerpts from Cage’s writings and diaries. The second volume is a reproduction of the talismanic 1972 portfolio Mushroom Book, a collaboration between Cage and his New York Mycological Society cofounder, textile designer Lois Long, consisting of mycological observations, anecdotes, and drawings. Taken together, they add new depth to Cage’s well-trod biography, situating him as a total artist, one whose every act was part of a lifelong pedagogical project.At the core of Cage's pedagogy was listening. His famous silent composition, 4'33" (1952), wasn't intended to highlight the absence of sound in the concert hall, but to induce an active listening state in which audience members would be able to perceive the incidental sounds around them. He particularly encouraged listening to nature: Trinder’s essay opens with Cage "conducting a performance" of the silent piece while hunting for mushrooms alone in the woods of Stony Point. "The second movement was extremely dramatic," Cage later wrote, “beginning with the sounds of a buck and a doe leaping up to within ten feet of my rocky podium.” He embraced Zen teachings about the importance of being receptive to the world, which offered an escape from society's ego-driven enclosure. He saw Zen as “a door through which the interior and exterior communicate,” and wrote that his mentor, the Buddhist scholar Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki, had given him the key to open it.Cage himself advises us not to read too much into mushrooms as a metaphor for his music. “I am not interested in the relationships between sounds and mushrooms any more than I am in those between sounds and other sounds,” he writes in the 1954 essay “Music Lovers’ Field Companion.” However, he also warns that foraging for edible mushrooms requires extreme attentiveness to avoid ending up in the hospital getting one's stomach pumped, as Cage did when he ate a poisonous hellebore, believing it to be skunk cabbage. Two toadstools—one that goes great in a cream sauce and another that causes a lethal drop in blood pressure—might be indistinguishable but for some tiny textural difference. The perceptive muscle required to differentiate them is akin to the heightened listening that Cage tried to provoke in his audiences.Philosophy aside, John Cage: A Mycological Foray paints a charming portrait of the composer by way of his habits and tastes. Unless you're an elite-level Cage expert, you probably don't know that he was just as inventive in the kitchen as he was on sheet music. In 1965, Vogue published a list of his recipes, including one for a ketchup alternative called “dogsup”: a reduction of salt, ginger root, mace, bay leaf, cayenne, black pepper, allspice, brandy, and mushrooms, which he specified should be preserved for a year before being served. The book's accompanying photos, depicting Cage foraging and lunching with friends, make for an intimate character study. Together with the anecdotes and excerpts, they immerse the reader in his world, offering a sense of what it might have been like to share buttered chanterelles and watercress salad at his table in Stony Point. Reproductions of nature photos from Cage’s personal collection also suggest what this world looked like through his eyes, hinting at the ways that his personal life conformed to the logic of his teachings. Every Cage fan knows that the man was as extraordinary as his art; the revelation offered by this book is that there's almost no point in trying to distinguish them.
ArtNews℗Richard Artschwager’s Late-Career New Mexico Drawings Take Viewers through the Plains of His Youth℗Scott Roben℗ArtinAmerica℗27/05/2020℗℗Sprüth Magers’s Richard Artschwager exhibition, “New Mexico,” on view through June 30 at the gallery’s location in Berlin (where businesses began reopening late last month), features an assortment of pastel drawings that bring viewers along for a ride through the plains of the state where the artist spent his teenage years. Artschwager lived in New York City and its surroundings for most of his career, and made these drawings in the decade before his death, in 2013. All landscapes except for one still life—Bowl of Apples (2007), a pit stop, perhaps—the works are an understated, rarely seen coda to his adventurous and challenging output, which traversed painting, furniture design, and sculpture and rubbed up against the fields of Minimalism, Conceptual art, and Pop.Throughout his work, Artschwager favored the tactile, and these drawings, despite the luminous, airy qualities of their imagery, are no exception. You sense the weight of his hand in the application of the pastel, which he laid down in deliberate marks that he left alone in some places and rubbed out to create hazy sfumato effects in others, such as the ocher and emerald fields in Bushes with Blue Sky (2011), where sporadic blurring evokes heat’s optical distortions. The coarse paper that serves as the drawings’ support participates just as actively in the images’ making as the hand does, the fibers breaking up the marks and giving the clear New Mexican air an irregular texture. In this way, the paper calls to mind Celotex—the compressed, industrial fiberboard that Artschwager began using as a painting support in the 1960s and whose pockmarked surface would weave itself into his images, lending them a certain eeriness. About Celotex, he once explained: “One could say it is paper on a grand scale, large in format and with a coarse tooth, looking something like newsprint under magnification.”But while certain qualities of the New Mexico drawings recall Artschwager’s other work, there are also departures—most notably, in terms of color. The drawings venture into a fuller palette than one is used to with Artschwager’s works, which, though sometimes bearing pops of color, are often dominated by neutrals—the grays of his acrylic paintings that transpose black-and-white photographs, for example, or the faux-wood tones of the Formica he incorporated into his most iconic sculptures. The palette here, by contrast, cycles through greens, grays, golds, and cerulean, and even plunges into a deep, moody ultramarine in the depiction of a night sky in Reflection (2010), a drawing on velvet. Artschwager generally used the pastels’ colors in unmodulated form, though at times he laid them atop gray or brown tones that unsettle or intensify the hues.One wall displays a sequence of six drawings composed of stacked horizontal fields of color that suggest plains receding into the distance, some with grids of planted shrubs. These works have a panning quality to them, making the experience of the group nearly filmic, an effect enhanced by the graininess the paper provides.Back home, I pulled out my copy of Agnes Martin’s collected writings to see what one of New Mexico’s most famous modernist residents (and proponents of the grid) might have had to say about the qualities of that landscape. I landed on a 1972 text (based on notes for a lecture), in which Martin shares an insight concerning the plains:I used to paint mountains here in New Mexico and I thoughtmy mountains looked like ant hillsI saw the plains driving out of New Mexico and I thoughtthe plain had itjust the plane.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .When I draw horizontalsyou see this big plane and you have certain feelings likeyou’re expanding over the planeAlthough influenced by the New Mexican plains, Martin did not aim to depict them. She wanted to distill their qualities, as seen in her shift from “plain” to “plane,” from geography to geometry, in the passage above. “Anything can be painted without representation,” she asserts a few lines further down the page.While Martin courted a sense of transcendence at the outer limits of painting, Artschwager reveled in the messy, contaminated spaces between categories. In the aforementioned sequence of horizontally structured drawings, he, at once, depicted the New Mexican landscape, collapsed and abstracted that space, and motioned toward film. Unlike Martin, Artschwager did not make works “without representation,” but, instead, showed representation to be permeable to many other ways of seeing. That kind of fluidity, never forced but simply given in these drawings, carries its own kind of transcendence.
ArtNews℗Frida Kahlo’s Visits to the United States Helped Crystallize Her Unique Artistic Persona℗Annette Leddy℗ArtinAmerica℗26/05/2020℗℗Celia Stahr, Frida in America: The Creative Awakening of a Great Artist, New York, St. Martin’s Press, 2020; 400 pages, $29.99 hardcover.Circe Henestrosa, Gannit Ankori, with Hillary C. Olcott, Frida Kahlo and San Francisco: Constructing Her Identity, San Francisco, Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, and Munich, Hirmer, 2020; 96 pages, 70 color plates, $22.95 paper.Few women artists have used their own face and wardrobe in their work as extensively as Frida Kahlo. Two recent publications—Frida in America: The Creative Awakening of a Great Artist, by Celia Stahr, and Frida Kahlo and San Francisco, by Circe Henestrosa and Gannit Ankori—emphasize that Frida treated clothing as an artistic palette and her way of dressing as continuous with the self-portraits she painted. A child of the Mexican Revolution and a proud exemplar of mexicanidad, she dressed as a freelance ambassador abroad, often turning potentially condescending response into respectful wonder. She did the same with her disability. What for others might have been a mortifying lameness and barrenness, Frida transformed into a compelling source of art. She embellished her orthopedic corsets and shoes like canvases, and portrayed her miscarriages as richly provocative dreams. She modeled identity politics as art, which is part of what has made her an icon.Still, for a long time, Frida suffered the discrimination all women artists endure. An eccentric, the wife of famous artist Diego Rivera, and unconventional in her beauty, she never attained major status during her lifetime. She had only two solo shows, one of them arranged by a female colleague, photographer Lola Álvarez Bravo. But the stars finally aligned in Frida’s favor in 1983, when Hayden Herrera produced her engaging Frida: A Biography of Frida Kahlo. Based primarily on numerous firsthand interviews with people who knew Frida, it remains the definitive treatment of the artist’s life. In writing Frida in America, Stahr had the benefit of Herrera’s book and of Gannit Ankori’s life-and-work study Frida Kahlo (2013). She finds, in effect, a way to expand the accounts of Frida’s North America sojourns with her husband, who was commissioned to paint large-scale frescoes in San Francisco, New York, and Detroit in the 1930s. Where Herrera devotes ten pages to the seven-month San Francisco stay in 1930-31, and Ankori covers it in approximately eight, Stahr gives it eighty. The book recounts Frida’s time in New York (1931-32; 1933) and Detroit (1932-33) at the same leisurely pace. Its Epilogue concisely surveys additional New York visits in 1935, '38, and '39, and a brief return to San Francisco in 1940.Stahr's primary goal is to show that Frida’s “creative awakening” occurred in the United States, where she formed key relationships and made some of her most important work. Among the most nuanced passages are those about Frida’s intense personal relationships with Georgia O’Keeffe and Rivera’s studio assistant, Lucienne Bloch; we feel what it would have been like to know Frida. While many biographies lack a dramatic narrative arc because the lives of most people merely ebb and flow, Stahr convincingly portrays Frida’s 1938 show at Julien Levy Gallery in New York as a career crescendo. Frida becomes the artist and woman she set out to be, overcoming numerous obstacles, not least the emotional turmoil of her open marriage.Stahr applies a slightly fictionalized style to the story of Frida’s life. Her description of Diego and Frida’s arrival by train in San Francisco, for example, unfolds like a scene in a novel, with special attention to the heroine’s attire: “She wears a distinctive short jacket with two large hombrera-like shoulder flaps—à la matador—over a long dark skirt. In her hand she holds a beret.” Earlier in the same scene, Stahr crosses the line from evocation to speculation: “the observant Frida scanned the crowd like a cat wary of possible predators.” While contemporaneous accounts of Frida’s manner tend to justify this characterization, it is still a hypothetical leap. Yet, as storytelling, it works. Using such gambits, together with cleverly inserted quotes from local newspapers and excerpts from numerous letters from Frida to her mother, Stahr consistently evokes the feel of Frida’s days and relationships. We dwell in the narrative in a way we don’t in Herrera’s or Ankori’s.The publication of Frida Kahlo and San Francisco coincides with “Frida Kahlo: Appearances Can Be Deceiving,” an exhibition (currently viewable, through July 27, online only due to the pandemic) at the city’s de Young museum. Organized by fashion curator Circe Henestrosa at the Museo Frida Kahlo in Mexico City in 2012, the show centers on clothing and personal items recovered in 2004, with the reopening of a locked bathroom at Frida’s beloved home, the Casa Azul. Upon her death in 1954, Rivera had filled the room with her belongings and ordered it closed. For the current book, Henestrosa emphasizes the importance of dress to Frida, citing testimonies such as Carlos Fuentes’s dazzling description of her arrival at a concert in the Palacio de Bellas Artes in Mexico City.¹ Gannit Ankori wrote the San Francisco supplement, focusing on Frida and Diego’s time in the city at the beginning of the 1930s and their brief return ten years later, when they remarried there after a brief divorce.Ankori essentially repurposed the pertinent pages of her Kahlo biography for the new volume. She succinctly covers Frida’s key San Francisco experiences, including her delight in Chinatown; her friendship with Leo Eloesser (a physician who treated her for pain and became a trusted medical adviser); her painting showing horticulturist Luther Burbank, famed for his hybrids and his defense of evolutionary science, as both a rotting corpse and a living tree/man; and her posing for Edward Weston. Ankori’s essay draws heavily on the accounts of John M. Weatherwax, who wrote several stories and an unpublished play about the woman he dubbed the "Queen of Montgomery Street."² In one instance, he recounts Diego’s reaction to a portrait Frida was painting: “The King and Queen go to [a] gigantic easel. Don Diego looks long and soberly at his wife’s work. ‘Bueno,’ he says. After a while he adds in Spanish: ‘A pure and strong young woman’s spirit is as precious as the light of the stars.’”The “Gallery” section of the book features photographs of Frida at various stages of her life, along with artifacts including clothing, body casts, orthopedic shoes, hair ornaments, jewelry, and artworks. Colorful Indigenous outfits are juxtaposed with paintings or photographs of the artist wearing the very same array. These images inevitably recall fashion magazine articles in which garments are matched with the "right" earrings, sunglasses, necklace, and lipstick. In the book, Frida, through the medium of a curator, seems to give advice on how to style as she did.Frida’s self-adornment should be a viable topic for study, but the visual conventions of celebrity fashion coverage overwhelm this specific attempt. It's a sad twist that Frida’s strategy of drawing attention to her art by constructing a unique artist persona now shifts our attention away from her work. What was once a political act—dressing like an Indigenous woman—today leads straight to the museum gift shop.It was not always this way. When Frida’s art burst upon the US museum scene in the late 1970s, she still had the aura of difference. Her eccentricity, agonizing physical challenges, and unconventional love life had a certain shock value, but the novel and fascinating paintings were the focus. And she was a gateway drug, leading viewers onward to José Guadalupe Posada, or David Alfaro Siqueiros, or Leonora Carrington, or the French Surrealists. One possible raison d’être for shows like “Frida Kahlo: Appearances Can Be Deceiving,” or the New York Botanical Garden’s fannish “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life” (2015), may be that they open that path for a new generation, one accustomed to the lingua franca of celebrity fashion. 1  See Fuentes's introduction to The Diary of Frida Kahlo: An Intimate Self-Portrait, with essays and commentary by Sarah M. Lowe, New York, Harry N. Abrams, 1995, http://server.fhp.uoregon.edu/dtu/sites/kahlo/texts/fuentes.html.2 Weatherwax papers are held in the Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
ArtNews℗In a New Collection of Genre-Bending Essays, Wayne Koestenbaum Swerves from Literary Criticism to Sex Dreams℗Zachary Fine℗ArtinAmerica℗26/05/2020℗℗Wayne Koestenbaum’s prose can be picked out of a lineup more quickly than that of almost any living American writer. Other contemporary stylists have easily identifiable signatures, but few of them are as relentless. There are no quiet lines to offset the exuberant ones in his work. Across Koestenbaum’s essays, criticism, and fiction, it’s rare to find a single paragraph that doesn’t contain some combination of the following: the imperative mood, a memory or dream, a fantasy or desire (not infrequently debauched), the name of a star or starlet or other glamorous proper noun, a jarring comparison or compound (i.e. “cum-bucket consciousness”), a description of an odor or texture, a literary citation, a self-reflexive gesture. Every passage is a carnival of confident poses and wry transgression, blending scholarly diction and voluptuary seediness.Koestenbaum’s newest collection, Figure It Out, includes twenty-six essays, most of them previously published. There are explorations of particular artists and writers, including Adrienne Rich and Hervé Guibert; roaming studies of individual objects, like a new pair of glasses; and meditations on concepts such as line and celebrity. Among the titles of the essays: “The Porn Punctum,” “Of Smells,” “Punctuation,” “Do You Want to Touch It?,” and “Eighteen Lunchtime Assignments.” Though the texts are called essays, they are just as much dream logs, diary entries, lists, prompts, fiction, and criticism.In “Corpse Pose,” one of the highlights of Figure It Out, the opening paragraph proceeds from a yoga class to his plan to write an essay about “how literature should start enjoying its own corpse mode, its oft-foretold senescence,” which is then interrupted by the death of his stepfather. From there, the essay veers into the notes he keeps while painting (such as “Change color of lozenge behind butt”), his origins as a reader, stray memories of family life, passages on Walter Benjamin, reflections on a 1968 Kodak Super 8 movie camera displayed in his hallway, items on the shelf next to the camera, assignments of “asemic writing” for the reader, and reflections on the essay he is not writing, is failing to write.His prose has a tendency to look over its own shoulder, catching itself in the mirror. He likes to narrate his regrets, urges, and tics while he’s writing (“I have a problem knowing when to pause”; “I’ll wipe out all feeling from my voice, in the hope of luring you to fall in love with me”), but he also often explains the work of others in a way that reflects back on his own. In one essay, for instance, he points to the “unstoppered perversity and brilliant heedlessness” of the poet Ronaldo V. Wilson. In another, he describes how French writer Hervé Guibert favored “not the lyric or the essay but the autofiction, the fragmentary self-articulation, casual as a snapshot,” adding that reading Guibert involves “questioning straightened notions of what constitutes a polished piece of writing, or a life’s work, or an autobiography, or a sexuality, or a successful venture—and learning, instead, to appreciate the cadences of catastrophe, of self-excavating improvisation, and of unknowingness.” This is a better description of Koestenbaum’s writing—and the experience of reading his writing—than any critic will manage. It belongs to the kind of two-toned criticism that has become his signature: to read the self, always, through the object of study.As in most of Koestenbaum’s work, the writings in Figure It Out are fragmented and friable. Many of the essays are diced up into stand-alone paragraphs, often with an equally choppy ride between sentences. In “Of Smells,” which borrows its title from a 1580 essay by Montaigne, he describes his method as “collision”—“accident, concussion, bodies butting together.” One paragraph begins: “Montaigne mentions incense. Barbara, the first girl I’d heard confess that she loved masturbating, invited me to a Buddhist temple in Berkeley, but my parents didn’t approve.” First we get Montaigne, then we get Barbara. It’s very Koestenbaum to take off from a French philosophe and then to alight on a memory involving masturbation.Koestenbaum’s work often seems so unchained, so free, that it feels like it was written joyfully, without a trace of strain. There is a striking passage in “Corpse Pose” where he corrects this perception and almost reinforces it in the same stroke:“Does my relation to literature seem unencumbered? Do I seem a serene-tempered representative of literature’s pleasures, rather than its ordeals, curfews, and solitary confinements? Where did you get the idea that anyone’s relation to literature could come without fleshly exactions? When I write, I’m on the verge of physically exploding. Hands sweating, I’m hunched over, poised to attack or defend, like a raptor or a cowering dog. Language compels me to sweat, slaver, tremble, squeeze. My body is a bloody washcloth I’m systematically wringing. Sentences demand aviation: adrenaline and anxiety provide horsepower for my freakish, impossible flight. Caught in a schizogenic double bind, I use language to flee language.”Even though Koestenbaum constantly returns to his past and his body—its hungers, delights, and wounds—the tone has nothing of memoir or confession in it. Every divulgence seems highly controlled, like a studied free fall. The prose is wild and sensuous, but also meticulously crafted; note the alliteration (sweat, slaver, squeeze; body, bloody), the pairing of dry technical language and fleshier colloquial words (systemically/wringing, horsepower/freakish, schizogenic/flee). It’s precisely this fusion of the intimate and the analytic that allows his oversharing to read like undersharing, his divulgences like inquiries. In a fragment from the essay “Beauty Parlor at Hotel Dada,” he writes: “Dream: in a dark room I put John Ashbery’s hand (not willing but passive) on my cock and made him give me a hand job.” In the context of his writing, not even this disclosure seems mildly embarrassing or excessively personal. It belongs to the bounty of proper names, daily incident, play, and perversity that we learn to expect from his work.  Koestenbaum recently sold his papers to the Beinecke Library at Yale—entering the archive and finding a seat in literary history—and he was announced, in March, as the recipient of an award for exceptional literary achievement from the American Academy of Arts and Letters. Figure It Out has arrived in the wake of this recognition, and it’s an occasion for feeling encouraged about our distinguished academies and institutions. We can only hope they’ll go on making room for dreamt Ashberian hand jobs, lexical disobedience, and lively experiment.
ArtNews℗A Recent Book Explores What It Means to Write without Meaning℗David Ebony℗ArtinAmerica℗20/05/2020℗℗If you have ever been enthralled by ancient Maya glyphs, or by graffiti artist Rammellzee’s scrawl-like script, you know how it feels to appreciate the formal beauty of writings whose precise lexical import remains elusive or impenetrable. For most observers, unable to decipher Maya picture-words or Gothic Futurist graffiti, the semantic point of the texts may be ungraspable, but the efforts of these scribes—evident in the sheer visual intensity of their works—are clearly never pointless. The sinuous shapes of the signs and the rhythmic fluidity of the markings can convey to viewers a distinctive range of emotions, as well as, perhaps, a hint of the exhilarating freedom that other forms of writing could offer if liberated from what might be termed the shackles of meaning.      In his influential 1953 book Writing Degree Zero, Roland Barthes, examining the nuances and innovations of Stéphane Mallarmé’s poetry, remarks that “the word, dissociated from the husk of habitual clichés, and from the technical reflexes of the writer, is then freed from responsibility in relation to all possible context; it appears in one brief act, which, being devoid of reflections, declares its solitude and therefore its innocence.”  Barthes’s thoughts about writing, as well as the logogram-like drawings that he created throughout his career, are central to Asemic: The Art of Writing, Peter Schwenger’s engaging and groundbreaking book focused on the asemic as a cultural phenomenon and a rarefied genre of modern and contemporary art.Schwenger attributes the first uses of the term to Barthes and to Jacques Derrida, who, in his 1969 book Dissemination, refers to the blanks between words as “asemic spacing,” which makes signification possible without in itself signifying. As Schwenger explains, the linguistic term “seme” (derived from the Greek term sema, or sign) is negated or neutralized by the privative prefix “a-.” Thus meaning itself—or, rather, the sign’s capacity to convey meaning—is eliminated.    In various online exchanges in 1997, visual poets Jim Leftwich and Tim Gaze (the latter now publisher of the digital Asemic Magazine) applied the term to their quasi-calligraphic writings, drawings, and collages. Schwenger considers this act of naming to be the launch of “the asemic” as an international movement, which now encompasses a broad range of publications, exhibitions, and online activity.For art historians and critics, the asemic had already been in play for many years, but without a label as such. In light of the currrent asemic surge, Schwenger explores anew the work of pioneering artists like Mirtha Dermisache (1940–2012), from Argentina, and Mira Schendel (1919–1988), from Brazil. Schendel produced layered palimpsests of fractured letters, word fragments, and ostensibly indecipherable cursive script applied to large transparent acrylic sheets hung from the ceiling. Each of these works initially appears to be a completely meaningless text. But as the viewer focuses on isolated portions of the composition, seen from certain angles, details emerge and coalesce to suggest the possibility of a discernible statement, a potentially urgent message. Invariably, however, the message remains obscure.  Schwenger, an emeritus Professor who is now a resident fellow at University of Western Ontario’s Centre for the Study of Theory and Criticism, defines the interpretive tension that arises from close scrutiny of works like Schendel’s as “the asemic effect.” He sees this tension as a positive force rather than any sort of nihilistic or negative gesture. Early on in the book, endorsing a point made by UWO professor Laurence De Looze, he characterizes asemic art and writing as a form of resistance to global technology’s “linguistic machine that offers templates not only for words but also for thought; that values information over affect; and that reinforces the long history of the alphabet’s dominance over Western thinking.” Schwenger extols the asemic as a provocation to thought—without paraphrasable meaning, perhaps, but not without significance. He proposes, indeed, that “an awareness of what lies beyond our familiar structures of meaning may keep us from having our life scripts written according to an already existent system of signs.” A chapter titled “Three Asemic Ancestors” underscores the importance of the art and writing of Henri Michaux, Cy Twombly, and Barthes as key to appreciating subsequent asemic works in all their various forms. Michaux, inspired by certain works by Paul Klee and Max Ernst, explored the limits of words by means of scrawled forms, presented in lines, that appear to be a form of writing. Yet while these components suggest individual signs, they are actually neither individual nor signlike. Michaux’s seminal work Narration (1927, India ink on paper), regarded as one of the first examples of asemic writing, consists of eighteen horizontal rows of unruly scribbles, each separated by wide, irregular white intervals. The scrawls grow more agitated and compressed from the top of the page to the bottom, ending finally at the lower center edge with the work’s title quite legibly—and jarringly—handwritten in shaky block letters. Eschewing an expressionist vocabulary of abstract forms and gestures, Michaux concentrated on the pulse, rhythm, and movement of the line. The markings referred to the body in motion, as he aimed for a kind of shorthand dance notation rather than calligraphic import. These experiments culminated in his 1951 book Mouvements, filled with rows of bravura brushstrokes, lively gestures that recall activated stick figures. After Michaux traveled through Asia, he often made drawings that resemble Chinese characters or pictograms; but to convey the sensation of movement remained his central concern.                 Mouvements had a direct influence on Barthes’s paintings and drawings, which closely resemble Michaux’s. According to Schwenger, Barthes had learned from Michaux how to “bypass meaning in order to unlock the power of the illegible.” Barthes called his asemic drawings contre-écritures (counter-writings), and in 1976 published a number of them in the journal Luna-Park, alongside works by like-minded artists Dermisache and Brion Gysin.Barthes wrote quite extensively on Twombly’s work, and, culling from these texts, Schwenger presents a fascinating—and convincing—case for Twombly as the major asemic artist. Focusing on a 1973 painting, Virgil, he notes how Twombly, by means of the abjectly scrawled name of the poet in partly obliterated letters, manages to evoke—without in any way cognitively depicting or describing—Mediterranean culture and the city of Rome, where Twombly was living at the time. Referring to Barthes’s notion of “atmosphere” in Twombly’s work, Schwenger points out that what Swedish scholar and novelist Aris Fioretos calls the work’s “vapor wrought by erasers” takes on the character of an ambience, from which Virgil’s name emerges and to which it returns.While Virgil features a legible word, and serves to demonstrate the use of language in the artist’s practice, the significance of Twombly’s art for today's asemic movement centers on his completely illegible compositions filled with marks that formally resemble writing. Works from his 1967 “Letter of Resignation” series of thirty-eight drawings, for instance, feature irregular rows of frantically scribbled pencil markings on paper that vary in density and intensity from page to page, conveying a sense of recurrent rage. Schwenger suggests that “Letters” may have been a response to the hostile reception accorded Twombly’s 1964 exhibition at New York’s Leo Castelli Gallery. The show was harshly panned by most critics, including Donald Judd, who called it a “fiasco.” These reactions prompted Twombly to stop painting almost completely for a year.Subsequently, of course, Twombly recovered from the blow, and regained his reputation with totally asemic works, such as his well-regarded “blackboard” series of large paintings, produced in the late 1960s. Here, elliptical white markings in rhythmic rows set against slate gray grounds, often resemble cursive letters, yet consistently thwart legibility. In these works, Schwenger contends, “we are facing the inscriptive sublime, more powerful for the large scale of the paintings.”    Addressing the thorny topic of asemic writing and the natural world, Schwenger considers artists such as Rosaire Appel and angela rawlings, whose photographs of things like tree branches, leaves, and tracings in sand suggest elaborate scripts. Meanwhile, Cui Fei, in her ongoing series “Manuscript of Nature” and “Tracing the Origin,” arranges objects found in nature, such as dried vine tendrils and twigs, in a manner that conjures the wild-cursive style of Chinese calligraphy. The “characters” that appear in the series, however, remain unreadable.The elaborate and sometimes monumental installations of Chinese artists Wenda Gu and Xu Bing, produced since the 1980s, have taken the asemic concept to a new level. For his room-size Book from the Sky (1987–91), Xu Bing invented some four thousand indecipherable characters, each adhering closely to the conventions of Chinese word formation and calligraphic practice. Wenda Gu, in his many vast installations, incorporates script in pseudo-languages (both Eastern and Western in appearance), made of human hair collected from barbershops around the world. The letters of hair, Schwenger points out, express a “tension between the natural and the cultural.” The book concludes with an in-depth exploration of contemporary asemic novels, films, videos, and music scores, including books by graphic designer Christopher Skinner. His ambitious four-part novel, Four Fools (2011), features page after page filled with elegant script in a typeface of the artist’s invention, redolent of Islamic manuscripts. Like the ancient Maya glyphs that never fail to beckon, Skinner’s pages seem to be a product of some lost civilization, and to bear an enigmatic message. Perhaps someday it will be deciphered with the help of a futuristic Rosetta Stone. For now, though, the novel’s implied narrative unfolds only in the viewer’s imagination.Asemic: The Art of Writing is rewarding on a number of levels. It is surprising, though, that the world of Art Brut and outsider artists is apparently not part of Schwenger’s purview. Predating Michaux’s experiments, self-taught artists like Adolf Wölfli created elaborate, idiosyncratic, and largely indecipherable, written “languages,” and the connection here would seem to be appropriate, if not obvious. Schwenger’s endeavor apparently aims for the asemic to be acknowledged and embraced by the contemporary art world and cultural mainstream, which is commendable. It could be even more exciting, though, to further explore and underscore its revolutionary, counterculture potential. 1 Roland Barthes, Writing Degree Zero, New York, Hill and Wang, 1953/1967, p. 75. This article appears under the title “The Asemic Effect” in the May 2020 issue, pp. 25–27.
ArtNews℗According to Hal Foster, Good Art Asks Hard Questions. But Should Criticism Provide Answers?℗Erika Balsom℗ArtinAmerica℗18/05/2020℗℗In the interregnum of this socially distanced spring, reading Hal Foster’s What Comes After Farce? Art and Criticism at a Time of Debacle felt like a whirlwind tour through a period that had suddenly become historical, much faster than its author could have anticipated. Out from Verso Books today, the volume assembles eighteen short texts written over fifteen years—many of them originally published in the London Review of Books—beginning in the aftermath of 9/11 and ending with the ascendance of post-truth and post-shame politics under Trump’s presidency. In a 1994 essay on the neo-avant-garde, Foster was critical of Marx’s claim that historical events happen twice—first as tragedy, then as farce—deeming it a cynical way of framing “the contemporary as posthistorical.” But in 2020, he embraces Marx’s observation not only to describe “a president whose prototype seems to be the child monster Père Ubu,” but also as the premise for his entire book, which asks: “If farce follows tragedy, what follows farce?” In naming this a “time of debacle,” Foster underlines its uncertain, interstitial character: it is an era of collapse, but one that holds the possibility, however slim, of yielding positive change through a release of force. As he points out, the term debacle comes from the French débâcler, which refers to the breaking up of ice in a river.Organized into three sections—“Terror and Transgression,” “Plutocracy and Display,” and “Media and Fiction”—the book’s essays take up subjects ranging from Bush-era kitsch to the architecture of mega-museums and the work of politically engaged artists like Paul Chan and Claire Fontaine. Across them, a question resounds again and again, one that has lost none of its sharpness in these plague days: “How to respond?” Foster traces how artists have responded to the political situation, while also asking how art criticism should respond to artworks and, through them, the broader moment. Early on, apropos of the 2011–12 MoMA PS1 exhibition “September 11,” Foster asserts, “The prevalent mode of art viewing today is an affective one. If Kant resumed the ancient question ‘Is the work beautiful?’ and Duchamp formulated the avant-garde query ‘Is the work art at all?,’ our primary criterion seems to be ‘Does this image or object move me?’” Ample evidence for Foster’s argument can be found in the belletristic musings that increasingly fill the pages of many contemporary art publications. Ours is a time in which personal feeling is taken as the grounds for truth and authenticity. Foster refrains from overtly lambasting this tendency, yet despite his characterization of pathos as “our” primary criterion, there is little doubt that it is far from his own.What Comes After Farce? is broadly concerned with how leftist cultural politics can proceed when there are no veils left to pull back and it no longer matters whether Jeff Koons is “sincere or ironic or somehow both at once.” Foster belongs to a paradigm that preceded the rise of feeling as the ultimate arbiter of art, and that is devoted to evaluating works according to concepts and debates drawn from art history and critical theory. The artists upon whom he bestows the greatest favor tend to reformulate modernist strategies in light of contemporary exigencies. In a detailed reading of Kerry James Marshall’s Untitled (Underpainting), 2018, for instance, he shows how Marshall resuscitates the genre of the meta-picture, yoking it to a concern with black aesthetics and the colonial history of the museum. Foster commends the “old 1968er” Harun Farocki for holding fast to “stark oppositionality” in Brechtian films and installations that confront the changing relationship between eye and machine in a time of automation and algorithmic control.Far more prevalent today than Farocki’s approach is a strategy Foster calls “mimetic exacerbation,” whereby critical distance gives way to suffocating proximity. Artists intentionally exaggerate select features of contemporary existence, choosing to “take bad things and make them worse,” presumably to show how awful things really are—as if we didn’t know already. After endorsing this method in his 2015 book Bad New Days: Art, Criticism, Emergency, Foster here points to its risks. Surveying Hito Steyerl’s moving-image installations and writings, he delineates the artist’s pet subjects (“junk images,” “serious games”) and signature rhetorical moves. The latter leave him ambivalent. “Her motto,” he writes, “is ‘I don’t want to solve this contradiction, I want to intensify it,’ and her modus operandi is less to demystify ideological beliefs than to exacerbate corporate protocols, ideally to the point of an explosive transformation.” But does the cataclysm ever arrive? Foster concludes by casting doubt on what he sees as Steyerl’s quasi-cynical attachment to the thrills of the end times, wondering, “Why this apocalyptic tone from critics on the Left when we are surrounded by hell-fire politicians on the Right?” The question could be asked of many artists today.While Steyerl comes in for criticism, she also belongs to the tendency championed in the book’s third part, “Media and Fiction.” Steyerl, Trevor Paglen, and Forensic Architecture’s Eyal Weizman are first mentioned together as figures who “point to the urgent necessity of a science of agnotology, or the analysis of how it is we do not know or, better, how we are prevented from knowing.” One might call them the children of Farocki. In the book’s final and most substantial text, “Real Fictions,” first published in Artforum in 2017, they are associated with efforts to reframe the real by using “artifice to rehabilitate the documentary mode as an effective critical system.” If art is to wrest itself away from the domain of individual feeling and avoid becoming merely a luxury bauble owned by the plutocratic class, it might do so by making an epistemological gambit in the field of worldly reality.Foster never fully lays out the stakes of this media agnotology, nor does he discuss the divergent relationships to artifice found across the practices he mentions in this essay. He refrains from explaining how the use of artifice relates to the problem of “alternative facts.” Doing so would require a format altogether different than the one that What Comes After Farce? adopts. The title is apt, not only because it invokes a great problem facing the left—how to imagine a future amid this mess—but also because it reflects the interrogative quality of the book’s texts, many of which pose questions Foster makes no attempt to answer. In dangling conclusions, he gets to the heart of the matter, only to swiftly depart. It is a common gesture in short-form criticism, a way of signaling the big issue in the absence of the space or will to thoroughly confront it. “Model Worlds,” a text Foster wrote for a 2018 catalogue on Sarah Sze, winds down with a series of queries, finishing with the proposal that “the fact that her art prompts such questions so keenly. . . is central to its achievement.” Can the same be said of criticism? Is asking the right questions enough? It’s a start—but especially from a critic of Foster’s skill and stature, more answers might help clear some ice from the river.
ArtNews℗Living in Exile, Cuban Painter Carlos Alfonzo Developed an Expressionist Style Rooted in Afro-Cuban Imagery℗Gean Moreno℗ArtinAmerica℗18/05/2020℗℗In the 1970s, Carlos Alfonzo belonged to an underground community of young artists in Havana who pushed back against the Sovietization of Cuban culture by embracing new forms of expression that drew on Afro-Cuban religious imagery, premodern sign systems, and vernacular craft. This group—which included Juan Francisco Elso, José Bedia, and Ricardo Brey—gained recognition in exhibitions like the landmark “Volumen Uno” (1981) and the Havana Biennial (founded in 1984). By then, however, Alfonzo had departed from their ranks: he left the island in the 1980 Mariel boatlift, settling in Miami Beach and becoming an artist of exile rather than a member of the “1980s generation,” as the group was later known. In the United States, he developed a distinctive pictorial language and complex style.“Carlos Alfonzo: Witnessing Perpetuity,” at LnS Gallery in Miami, gathered major works from every phase of the artist’s career, which was cut short by his death from AIDS-related complications in 1991, at age forty-one. The impressive exhibition began with rarely seen late-1970s works characterized by a schematic, quasi-primitivist figuration. Three ink drawings titled “Tribal Series” (1979) display abstract petroglyphic forms floating in vertical columns on white grounds. Another drawing from this period, Yo nunca te tuve bajo un árbol (I Never Had You Under a Tree, 1976), features simplified graphics of palm trees, moons, fish, and human figures packed tightly together to form a dense allover pattern.Soon after immigrating to the US, Alfonzo began pursuing a more expressionistic approach and took up motifs that would recur throughout his mature work—such as tongues pierced with nails, eyes and smiling mouths elongated to look like tropical fruits, and spirals suggesting coiled phalluses. It took time, however, for him to find the optimal way to bring them together compositionally. Characterized by slashing, frenzied brushstrokes, his paintings from the early ’80s possess a new high-voltage energy, but the results are often muddy and confused. In Petty Joy (1984), repeating motifs are piled incoherently atop one another across an unstretched canvas tarp, the composition flattened by an excessive use of white.In the second half of the 1980s, things appear to have clicked for Alfonzo. The large vertical painting Shift (1987) feels at once brooding and full of energy, with areas of dark earth tones and blacks punctuated by furiously applied pink, yellow, white, and green passages. The composition is organized around a large spiral surrounded by motifs including knife-like shapes, eyes, and teardrops. Employing imagery linked to Afro-Caribbean religious practices, the painting suggests an abstracted altar erected deep in the woods, covered in offerings.During the final years of his life, while his health was deteriorating, Alfonzo produced the best works of his career: the stately, melancholic “Black Paintings” (1989–1991), two of which were included in the show. The paintings unveil themselves slowly: at first, the ten-foot-tall Home (1990) seems to depict only the white outline of an abstracted figure on a black ground that nearly overwhelms it. But the painting is brimming with partially hidden details, such as symbols roughly painted in subtly modulated shades of black. The work has a quasi-religious feel: its pictorial space is as tightly compressed as that of a medieval icon painting or an early illuminated manuscript, while its formal severity and architectural scale place it in the realm of altar backdrops or mausoleum doors. Made during the height of the AIDS crisis, the “Black Paintings” are not contemplative or peaceful. Instead, they express both an intense rage and a hope that flints in the dark, each element feeding on the other.
ArtNews℗An Exhibition Illuminates the Charged Relationship Between John Singer Sargent and His Black Muse, Thomas McKeller℗Jackson Davidow℗ArtinAmerica℗11/05/2020℗℗A fortuitous elevator encounter between two men at a posh Boston hotel in 1916 resulted in a relationship that was instrumental to the creation of some of the most celebrated artworks of early twentieth-century America. One man was the affluent, internationally acclaimed white portraitist John Singer Sargent, and the other a young working-class black elevator attendant, Thomas McKeller, whose handsome looks and muscular body caught the artist’s attention. Over the next decade, until Sargent’s death in 1925, McKeller was the primary model for the artist’s projects in the United States, including the monumental murals and bas-reliefs he created for the rotunda at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (completed in 1925). Showing vignettes from Greco-Roman mythology, the allegorical murals were intended to highlight the museum’s responsibility to promote and preserve the arts. In them, Sargent transformed McKeller into a number of characters—both male and female, and invariably white-skinned. Only one painting of McKeller by Sargent shows the model’s actual skin tone: an intimate nude portrait that the artist never publicly exhibited, Thomas McKeller (1917–21), in which McKeller boldly bears his chest, his legs apart. Read one way, the work might testify to Sargent’s desire for, or perhaps control over, his vulnerable subject. Yet at the same time, it can be seen as empowering, a rare representation of the model as he actually looked.The exhibition “Boston’s Apollo: Thomas McKeller and John Singer Sargent” at the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum—scheduled to be on view through September 14, though the museum is currently closed—explores how this uneven relationship between artist and model was structured by differences of race, class, age, and possibly sexuality. (Many scholars have suggested that Sargent, a lifelong bachelor, was gay. McKeller eventually married, in 1934.) In addition to Sargent’s painted portrait of McKeller, the show includes a previously unexhibited portfolio of the artist’s preparatory drawings for the MFA rotunda murals, which he gave to Isabella Stewart Gardner, his friend and benefactor, in 1921. These charcoal studies, discovered by the exhibition’s curator, Nathaniel Silver, in 2017, show McKeller in a number of poses, emulating figures ranging from the bowman Achilles to the singing personification of Romantic Art. Unlike the final murals, these drawings sensuously portray McKeller’s body without concealing his racial identity.The drawings and portrait are accompanied by archival correspondence and a detailed timeline charting details of Gardner’s, Sargent’s, and McKeller’s biographies alongside concurrent social and cultural shifts in Boston, from the Jim Crow era until the passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1964, two years after McKeller’s death. Mapping out the worlds in which McKeller, Sargent, and Gardner lived, these supplemental materials effectively make the case that narratives of modern American art cannot be segregated from black history. In an introductory video by the show’s entrance, McKeller’s last living descendent, formerly unaware of her ancestor’s modeling, is acquainted with this remarkable history. Although the video, with its tinge of melodrama, recalls an episode of Henry Louis Gates Jr.’s “Finding Your Roots,” it grounds the exhibition in a lived reality, fleshing out McKeller as a real person with a family and community rather than simply an anonymous model.Silver invited local scholars and artists to write responses to the works. While these responses, which are displayed as wall labels, sometimes impose contemporary ideas about race, class, and sexuality on material from the early twentieth century, they are the most compelling part of the exhibition. Some contributors offer interpretations of the drawings, while others speculate about the charged relationship between artist and muse. In one text, artist Steve Locke, a gay black portrait painter who lived in Boston for many years, casts figurative painting as a collaboration between artist and model.Exhibitions rarely give models their proper due, particularly black models, whose contributions to art history have regularly been overlooked. A notable exception is “Posing Modernity: The Black Model from Manet and Matisse to Today”—a landmark 2018–19 show at Columbia University’s Wallach Art Gallery that traveled, in modified form, to the Musée d’Orsay and explored the significance of Laure, the model for the black maid in Manet’s Olympia (1863). “Boston’s Apollo,” with its nuanced analysis of power and race, rigorously contextualizes the relationship between McKeller and Sargent, ultimately positing that McKeller was not simply a model but a cocreator of the works for which he posed.
ArtNews℗Art Historians Are Obsessed With Recovering Lost Names. But Are They Asking the Wrong Questions?℗Amelia Rina℗ArtinAmerica℗10/05/2020℗℗Numerous curators and scholars have endeavored to recover names of forgotten, oppressed, or under-recognized artists as a countermeasure to the stronghold on name recognition maintained by a select group of white men—Rembrandt, Picasso, Warhol, and Koons, to cite a miniscule few. Independent curator Lucy Cotter pursued a different approach in “The Unknown Artist,” an exhibition she organized for the Center for Contemporary Art & Culture at the Pacific Northwest College of Art (PNCA) in Portland that—rather than highlighting marginal names—probed the very values of attribution. The show featured eleven unattributed objects from around the world that spanned twelve centuries, as well as ten contemporary artworks exploring anonymous making in present contexts ranging from industrial manufacturing to collective movements.Cotter selected the unattributed objects from among the roughly 1,300 such works that once belonged to Portland’s Museum of Contemporary Craft (MoCC). Since MoCC closed in 2016, these works have been stewarded by PNCA. The examples on view ranged from a pre-Columbian ceramic seated figure holding a gourd (ca. 800–1000 CE) to woven wool textiles from the 1940s to an intricately woven basket (1971) from the Nupe tribe in Nigeria. The label for each read, ARTIST UNKNOWN. The wide-ranging assortment spoke to the diverse reasons that works go unattributed: some pieces were considered women’s work and therefore craft rather than fine art, while others were ritual or functional objects later appropriated for the art museum context. Perhaps some were collectively produced, belonging to a time, culture, or tradition that places little value on authorship or autonomy.The contemporary artworks that accompanied these objects framed attribution not just as an art historical problem, but as a labor issue, raising questions concerning which makers are named and valued. In the eleven-minute video 75 Watt (2013), London-based artists Revital Cohen and Tuur Van Balen transform factory workers’ repetitive actions into absurd choreography. The camera pans down a line of workers at a conveyor belt in a factory in Zhongshan, China. At first, the video appears to show regular factory activities. However, instead of starting with a product design and then determining the necessary actions to assemble it—cut here, adhere there, wire internally—the artists observed the movements of assembly line workers and designed an object whose sole purpose was to create a performance surrounding its fabrication. The product—a kind of angular plastic object with a handle—represents production for production’s sake, underscoring the societal indifference to the impact of manufacturing on human welfare. Cohen and Van Balen hired sixteen workers from the Zhongshan factory to perform, and included their names in the credits, framing the bodily dexterity required for industrial manufacturing as an art form.While Cohen and Van Balen act as puckish critics of mass production, devalued human labor, and vacuous consumerism, Cannupa Hanska Luger, a New Mexico–based artist raised on the Standing Rock Reservation in North Dakota, highlights the kind of making that privileges shared goals over individuality and authorship. For Mirror Shield Project (2016), he was inspired by women who held up mirrors to riot police during the 2013 Euromaidan protests against government corruption in Ukraine. When members of the Standing Rock Sioux nation began protesting the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL) in 2016, he conceived of a way to use the Ukrainian protesters’ tactic against the increasingly violent government and police response, making reflective shields out of plywood covered in mylar. He then posted an instructional video online and encouraged people both local and remote to make mirror shields for the protesters. At PNCA, this video played across from two mirror shields used during the DAPL protests as well as documentation of their use. Combining simple, low-cost crafts and networked collaboration, The Mirror Shield Project offers a potent force for resistance. The uncredited craftspeople here are not exploited laborers but collaborators.Both 75 Watt and The Mirror Shield Project highlight the potential for artistry in cheap, mass-produced materials. Other works in the exhibition do the reverse, showing how easily once-treasured objects can fall into obsolescence. Like the unattributed works from MoCC’s collection, an untitled installation from Hungary-based Zsolt Asztalos’s series “Unknown Artists III” (2014–19) illustrates the tragically mundane process by which artworks can become mere things. In this work, replicas of generic, unattributed European paintings that belong to various museums sit on metal shelves with a messy collection of art installation tools. Some of the reproductions are bubble wrapped and rendered invisible. They feel totally insignificant, as do the board-mounted photographs of paintings unceremoniously stacked and draped with packing paper.“The Unknown Artist” provided a nuanced framework for thinking about notions of artistic authorship, raising provocative questions: How are economic and cultural value distributed? How can we recalibrate value systems built on exploitation? How can authorship reveal or hide labor, and is authorship inherently valuable? While the answers remain elusive, the show brought together a variety of works that provided a new vocabulary for imagining radical, much-needed alternatives to the status quo.
ArtNews℗Teens Wander a Postapocalyptic World in Stanya Kahn’s New Film℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗14/05/2020℗℗Stanya Kahn’s film No Go Backs (2020)—streaming on Vielmetter Los Angeles’s website through May 15—opens with a majestic, symmetrical shot of two teenage boys standing in the desert under a hazy sky, peeing into the scrub. For the first portion of the film, they appear to be the only people left alive in the world. They bike through a seemingly depopulated California, undertaking a journey that loosely traces, in reverse, the course of the aqueduct system that delivers water down to Los Angeles from the Sierras. They shelter in the shadow of sandstone spires. Conspicuously, they never speak. Instead, the narrative—if you can call it that—is driven by their desultory migration and the things they find along the way. They search abandoned structures, small buildings that, stripped to their studs, are barely buildings. They try on fake fur coats in a trashed homesteader cabin. One of the protagonists drags a fireplace poker out of the rubble covering the floor. Was there even a fireplace? Was this ever a home?Kahn has frequently portrayed contemporary civilization as a wasteland of images and objects in her work—which includes performances and photographs in addition to films—but No Go Backs may be her starkest, most atmospheric treatment of the theme to date. Her earlier films tended toward a humorous, even slapstick, feel. In them, loquacious characters, usually played by the artist herself, often wander the margins of LA, delivering monologues prompted by the abandoned or abject things they encounter. In a 2008 film Kahn made in collaboration with Harry Dodge, All Together Now, her character discovers a pair of dead kittens in an alley. She buries them, carrying out a tender ritual that alludes to the larger human project of making meaning out of the senseless. In the 2006 Can’t Swallow It, Can’t Spit It Out, also made with Dodge, Kahn’s character happens upon a pile of ash sitting against a singed stucco wall. “Look, a person burned. Zoom in on that, man,” she says, addressing the camera. “It’s like some guy was just standing there, and then he burned. That kind of stuff happens.” It does—and the greater truth, as Kahn suggests throughout her body of work, is that all of civilization consists of the singed remains of obscure past events.In No Go Backs, the adults who made whatever mess the protagonists have found themselves in are gone, along with their ambitions, and the boys are too stunned, wary, or ill-equipped to pick up the plot that got aborted. Halfway through the film, other teenagers emerge, apparently following the same path as the boys. Their movement out of the city, along the Los Angeles River, against its flow, counters the expectation of progress their forebears had. Their escape route recalls the young misfits’ path in Antonioni’s Zabriskie Point (1970), moving from civilization’s discontents toward the dirty, splendid freedom of nature. In Kahn’s film, however, the landscape is presented in a deadpan manner, unidealized and just there—a monotonous desert or tedious forest that you simply move through.In fact, while a strong sense of nostalgia runs through No Go Backs, the longing does not appear to be for some vague return to nature. Flashbacks pepper the film: the boys skateboarding in a driveway, visiting a food truck. One of the protagonists is played by Kahn’s son, and in one flashback we see this character sitting in his bedroom, with a photo on the wall of Kahn holding him as a child. The film’s nostalgia, in the end, is for the world that we live in today, the one we seem determined to destroy.
ArtNews℗Cringe No More: An Online MoMA Exhibition Recasts Home Movies as Worthy of Critical Attention℗Hannah Stamler℗ArtinAmerica℗06/05/2020℗℗In the popular imagination, home movies are rather like opinions: everyone has them and they are usually lousy. Such films conjure a series of unflattering associations, from the embarrassing footage on “America’s Funniest Home Videos” to endless vacation reels to birthday party documentation ruined by an errant finger on the camcorder lens. Home movies are bad films produced by bad filmmakers, their value largely sentimental.The Museum of Modern Art’s “Virtual Views: Home Movies,” the first in a series of online exhibitions organized by the museum in the wake of COVID-19, challenges this perspective.  The exhibition is an adaptation of “Private Lives, Public Spaces,” a sprawling survey that opened at the museum in October and that featured over two hundred digitized reels of amateur films from MoMA’s collection, nine of which are included in this virtual sampler. Positioning these films as a body of work worthy of critical reflection and appreciation, these exhibitions lend MoMA’s institutional ballast to a small but growing movement in film scholarship to do for home movies what historians of photography have done for the snapshot. As curators Ron Magliozzi and Brittany Shaw explain in an accompanying video, “How to See: Home Movies,” the genre accounts for most moving images made in the twentieth century, constituting a vast “people’s cinema” capable of providing a rich and poignant visual history from below.The show’s premise is compelling, but the delivery is imperfect—understandable for an exhibition assembled quickly and under difficult circumstances. It is not entirely clear how the curators selected the nine films included in the online exhibition, and whether they are being highlighted as exceptional, or representative, examples of the form. The opening section, “Celebrities, ”featuring movies by Salvador Dalí, composer Aaron Copland, and cinematographer Henry Sharp, is a perplexing beginning for an exhibition dedicated to celebrating an expressly popular form. Though technically a home movie, Dalí’s 1954 film reads more as an extension of his formal artistic practice, consisting of a series of surreal self-portraits. Sharp’s “Spanish People at Pickfair” (1929), meanwhile, resembles a Hollywood casting call, featuring Sharp’s famous friends Charlie Chaplin and Mary Pickford playacting for the camera.There are enjoyable moments to be had here: who can resist Dalí’s impish smiles or Chaplin’s slapstick? But in opening with “Celebrities,” the exhibition risks suggesting that home movies should be evaluated by the standards of fine art or Hollywood, a framework that seems at odds with the show’s mission to evaluate a vernacular form on its own terms. The theme is also somewhat unimaginative: it is not surprising to learn that professional artists took to home movies and did so with above-average skill and care. Similarly predictable is our capacity to be drawn in by amateur films featuring professional stars. What is Instagram, or Warhol’s Factory films (themselves a sort of home movie) if not proof that banal activities can become captivating when carried out by the beautiful or charismatic.Discovering the pull of nondescript films is of much greater interest here. The exhibition picks up in part two, “The Experience of Place.” While two of the films are unattributed travelogues—a 1927 reel capturing a group of friends camping in Canada, and a sequence of vignettes shot in New Jersey’s Liberty State Park in 1981—the standout piece, “Sixth Avenue—Subway—Post” (1944/45), comes from a professional filmmaker, Charles L. Turner. His credentials are hinted at in the movie itself, which documents his commute from Manhattan to the Army Pictorial Service in Astoria, Queens, where he served during World War II before resuming his career in commercial film.This pedigree raises the question of whether “Sixth Avenue—Subway—Post” can be truly considered “amateur”—a term the curators would do well to define—even if it is far plainer than the typical professional production, with few frills and zero celebrity cameos. A straightforward account of a basic routine, the film shows how even the most ordinary subjects can grow remarkable over time. Viewed today, it offers a rare glimpse of life during World War II, and a vivid time capsule of 1940s New York City. Here are portraits of young soldiers and secretaries, now elderly or deceased. Here are pencil mustaches and Rita Hayworth hairstyles. Here are open tracts of land in what is now a dense part of Queens. Watching the film in the midst of today’s health crisis, it also takes on a cathartic quality, gifting us with a vicarious, carefree trip on New York’s streets and sidewalks.The show’s third section, “Family,” is its strongest. If part two establishes that ordinary subjects can be affecting, this part challenges the very idea of ordinariness, displaying three films with different variations on its standard theme, each more complex than they appear at first glance. Beneath its Hallmark surface, a movie of a wealthy, white nuclear family titled “Father & Kid NYC” (ca. 1940s), for example, subtly upends gender conventions. Showing a father doting on his daughter, the movie is a forceful testament to paternal affection—and an example of female directing. (With dad in front of the camera, mom was likely the person behind the lens.) By contrast, the protagonists of “Jarret Family Home Movies” (1958–67), a three-hour compilation of home movies by Pittsburgh firefighter David H. Jarret, are African American and working-class—demographics underrepresented in twentieth-century popular culture. This ensemble of films could easily double as a portrait of the Hill District, the historic black area where the Jarrets resided, and whose streets and residents David H. Jarret prolifically recorded, broadening the definition of “family” to encompass neighbors and the larger urban community.Left unattended after Jarret’s death, the reels in “Jarret Family Home Movies” grew moldy and their emulsions decomposed. Far from reducing their appeal, however, the damage has enhanced them, generating marbled splotches of blue and white that dance across the frame and might be at home in a Stan Brakhage work—a fact that blurs the line between error and invention, and points to overlaps between amateur and avant-garde filmmaking. The enigmatic “Jarret Home Moves” provides a thoughtful end to a show too focused on skilled amateurs, demonstrating that even people with no artistic training can create moving images of lasting beauty. It shows that there is not only historical but also aesthetic merit to be found in even the most inexpert of productions.
ArtNews℗Jean Shin’s Latest Installation Showed the Environmental Impact of Our Desire to Connect℗Dorothy R. Santos℗ArtinAmerica℗04/05/2020℗℗In his book Radical Technologies: The Design of Everyday Life (2017), interface designer and cultural critic Adam Greenfield writes: “We need to understand ourselves as nervous systems that are virtually continuous with the world beyond the walls, fused to it through the juncture of our smartphones.” Our increasing dependence on digital forms of connection has a price, of course, resulting in, for instance, vast amounts of electronic waste. Jean Shin made this reality strikingly visible in “Pause” (2020), an installation at the Asian Art Museum in San Francisco for which she turned thousands of discarded phones, laptops, hard drives, and cables into a sculptural landscape.Shin regularly creates installations in which meaning accrues through the accumulation and alteration of found objects. Her installation Everyday Monuments (2009), shown at the Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington, D.C., brought together some two thousand sports trophies, donated by area residents, that she modified by giving the athletic figures props like brooms, hammers, and tires, so that the trophies became celebrations of everyday labor. For MaiZE (2017), at the Figge Art Museum in Davenport, Iowa, Shin drew inspiration from the local agricultural landscape. The work was a labyrinth of green plastic bottles stacked, cut, and molded to resemble cornstalks. She worked with eight hundred volunteers to realize the installation, involving the community in a project that engaged issues of plastic waste and environmental stewardship. “Pause,” too, was a collaboratively produced, environmentally minded artwork that bore an intentional relationship to the city in which it was shown—in this instance, a hub of the tech and telecom industries.At the center of the installation was a sculptural work called Huddled Masses, which consisted of three hunched and twisted columns assembled from plastic and metal. As you looked at them, you recognized obsolete devices: PalmPilots, BlackBerry pagers, and Motorola Razr flip phones, among others. Computer power cables lay in waves around columns’ bases, forming curving patterns like sand in a Japanese rock garden. The mise-en-scene reminded me of depictions of the Fates, the Greek goddesses who are tasked with assigning people destinies and often shown weaving the future. Like the Fates’ threads, the power cords are components of systems that connect and disconnect people. Around the gallery’s perimeter were poufs woven from thousands of ethernet cables. Visitors were welcome to sit on them as they took in the work.“Pause” invited the audience to slow down and reflect. While all museums are spaces for contemplation, the site of “Pause”—a small corner gallery closed off by black glass doors—seemed especially conducive to meditation. There was a tension between serenity and dread in the space. The installation was not just an archaeological presentation of electronics from the past two decades, but a confrontation with our present dependence on such devices, a spectacle of mass consumerism. Our drive to connect is tethered to a desire for novelty: we want more from our technology. We want to share and consume more information more quickly. And so the companies that employ a substantial portion of the Bay Area’s population innovate and release updates that render previous iterations of their products obsolete.To gather the materials for “Pause,” Shin partnered with GreenCitizen, a Bay Area–based organization that collects electronics for recycling, and the museum helped distribute an open call for Bay Area residents to donate phones for the work. That the installation used waste from a mere fraction of a local population only helped viewers envision the massive environmental impact of the global production, disposal, and destruction of electronics.Shin’s work has often been compared to that of Tara Donovan, who creates undulating, monumental installations out of mundane objects. But while Donovan’s installations are formal exploration of repetition and scale, and demonstrations of how those qualities create a sense of awe, Shin’s channel wonderment into social awareness. In “Pause,” her provocations pushed viewers to reflect on a condition Greenfield describes as follows: “What keeps us twitching at our screens, more even than the satisfaction of any practical need, is the continuously renewed opportunity to bathe in the primal rush of communion.” We are eager to connect even when there is nothing to see. Representing this nervous compulsion in an alluring sculptural installation, Shin forced viewers to pause, if only for a moment.
ArtNews℗Netflix Documentary 'Circus of Books' Tells the Story of a Mom and Pop Gay Porn Store in LA℗Jameson Fitzpatrick℗ArtinAmerica℗03/05/2020℗℗In a comic reversal of the usual roles, it’s the parents hiding the porn from their children in Circus of Books, the new documentary by artist, musician, and filmmaker Rachel Mason. The follow-up to her 2013 debut feature The Lives of Hamilton Fish—an experimental musical inspired by two historical contemporaries who shared the same name—Circus of Books, streaming on Netflix, offers a heartfelt and comparatively conventional portrait of Mason’s parents, Karen and Barry, and the titular pair of gay adult bookstores they ran in Los Angeles for over thirty years. Featuring extensive interviews with and footage of the Masons, their two sons (who, like their daughter, were kept in the dark throughout their childhood about the true nature of their parents’ business), their former employees, and various others, the documentary follows a familiar “rise and fall” arc: from the unlikely career change the couple embarked on as new parents to the bookstore’s meteoric success amid the AIDS epidemic and the Reagan administration’s crusade against pornography to, finally, its decline in the age of the internet.The Mason family has more than enough psychosexual drama to fill the film’s eighty-six-minute running time. The imperturbably affable Barry takes his cues (sometimes quite literally) from the strong-willed Karen, a more complex and less consistently sympathetic figure. While Barry is not religious, Karen is a practicing Conservative Jew, and seems to have dealt with her shame about working in the adult industry by attempting to make her family as picture-perfect as possible. Their three children responded to this pressure in different ways: Micah, about whom we learn the least, says that the force of his mother’s expectations made him quiet; Rachel rebelled by becoming an artist and embracing all things countercultural; and Josh, who is gay, suffered from a textbook case of “Best Little Boy in the World” syndrome, sublimating his anxiety about his sexuality into academic and athletic achievement. When he came out to his parents in college—after several failed attempts—Karen told him, as she herself recalls in the film, that God must be punishing her.Circus of Books is at its best when it lets itself be a film about the complicated character that is Karen Mason, a woman whose business acumen is matched by—and perhaps predicated on—profound self-delusion. Although it was Karen who suggested that Barry become a distributor of Larry Flynt’s Hustler magazine in the first place—a move that catalyzed their eventual entry into the world of gay porn—she displays a rather impressive amount of cognitive dissonance concerning their chosen profession, while Barry seems to have never had any qualms about it. Even when they expanded their business and began producing hardcore films of their own, Karen says, “It never felt like we were getting into pornography. We were just getting into a different business that was related to the business we were already in.” Besides, she protests (a bit too much), they never watched the movies they made.The documentary has less to say about the community of which the Circus of Books stores were ostensible centers. Though the former employees make for an entertaining Greek chorus of talking heads, and there are a few fun stories about the bookstores’ (secondary?) function as cruising sites, most of the gay people in this film about gay bookstores are peripheral to the story of the nuclear family at its heart. While crafting a moving and quite watchable narrative, Circus of Books never really examines the delicate symbiosis between that family and the community whose patronage—and labor—supported them for decades.The movie’s last act interweaves the final days of the original West Hollywood location in early 2019 (the other store, in Silverlake, closed in 2016) with Karen’s transformation decades earlier into a proud PFLAG parent who speaks at meetings and marches in the local Pride parade with Barry. While I found myself tearing up at Karen’s admission that “parents are only smart for a small window of time”—and moved by her dedication to helping others accept their LGBTQ children—the film, in its hurry to a half-happy ending, glosses over how, exactly, her transformation came to be, and doesn’t delve into how Karen squares her celebration of gay people with her continued discomfort with gay sex.In the end, I found myself wanting Mason’s charming, well-composed film to probe a little deeper. Her dynamic with her mother never comes into focus the way Josh’s does, for instance, though it makes for some of the most compelling scenes—when out in the world, or at the store, Karen addresses her daughter behind the camera, usually to criticize or complain about Mason’s direction and occasionally to suggest she make her documentary about something else. (The movie opens with footage from a grainy home video in which a younger Karen tells her, “Rachel, this is going to be such a boring tape.”) These moments are compelling precisely because of how real and revealing they are, but the tension between Mason and the primary subject of her film, her mother, is never explicitly addressed (nor, notably, is Mason’s own queer identity or her relationship with a porn actor, Buck Angel). Early in the film, Karen, gesturing toward a wall of dildos at an adult novelty expo, remarks that she’s able to notice what would sell well at her bookstores without having to really look at it. That seems an equally fitting description of Mason’s approach to the questions her documentary brings up but leaves unanswered.
ArtNews℗In Sculptures and Prints, Mrinalini Mukherjee Captured the Wildness of Nature℗Skye Arundhati Thomas℗ArtinAmerica℗30/04/2020℗℗Born in Mumbai in 1949, two years after Indian Independence, Mrinalini Mukherjee, who died in 2015, belonged to a generation of artists emerging in the 1960s who attempted to decolonize the young nation’s visual arts. Primarily a fiber-based sculptor, she used materials indigenous to South Asia, like hemp, jute, cotton, wool, and sisal, updating Indian craft techniques to develop a unique hybrid language that combined the traditional and the modern. She frequently modeled her sculptures on flora but—as Nilima Sheikh recalls in the catalogue for the artist’s 2015 retrospective at the National Gallery of Modern Art in New Delhi—had no interest in “pretty English landscapes.” Instead, her inspirations tended to be wild and tropical: spiky date palms and lush mango groves, bougainvillea and plantain trees.Mukherjee also created works on paper throughout her career, often experimenting with printmaking in periods between working on her labor-intensive sculptures, which could take months to construct. Jhaveri Contemporary’s exhibition, which was titled “Bagh” (Hindi for “garden”), juxtaposed nineteen etchings of landscapes from the 1970s and ’80s with eight sculptures in bronze, a material Mukherjee began working with in the early 2000s. Mukherjee’s etchings have a runny, slippery quality that recalls watercolor painting. Her fine yet erratic lines vividly animate the natural world she depicts, giving the prints a sense of momentum. In River (1983), trees move at impossible angles along a river’s banks as the water rushes beneath their swooning canopy. In Storm (1984), a countryside scene is electrified by a burst of dark rain, which explodes over the landscape.Some etchings are made buoyant by the presence of animals or birds. Afternoon (1979) depicts a plump squirrel with an ample, fluffy tail curiously raising its nose in the air, while in Crow (1979), a single bird cuts across a tableau brimming with plants, trees, and flowers. Each bit of flora is individually detailed, with different types of incisions on the plate used to render the distinct textures of fronds, bark, and stems. In the etchings, we notice Mukherjee’s eye for subtlety: for instance, the way a certain leaf shifts in the wind, or how water curves against a riverbank.The etchings set the stage for the show’s sculptures. While the prints offer insight into her painstaking attention to nature’s details, the bronzes, from the end of her career, show how she transformed and reimagined her observations of the living world. To create them, Mukherjee used an improvised version of the lost-wax technique, sculpting wax models by hand before casting them in bronze and carving abstract figures onto the surfaces of the finished sculptures using tools borrowed from a local orthodontist.Despite Mukherjee’s use of bronze, a medium associated with permanence, the sculptures maintain a sense of pliability, as if they might change shape in an instant. Cluster (2008) is an upright figure composed of many sheets of metal, with a twisted neck and scooped mouth from which a pearl-like sprout emerges: a sweet offering. Outcrop VI (2007–08) lies flat on the floor, rather like a crushed orchid with its petals in disarray. The sculptures are erotic and corporeal, as though resulting from feeling and touch, not sight. Glinting in the light, they look supernatural, even alien, as though coming into being and dissipating at the very same time. You can almost hear them ooze and leak, gurgle and fizz.
ArtNews℗Jutta Koether’s Paintings Are Clever and Achingly Cool—But Can They Do More?℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗29/04/2020℗℗The paintings in Jutta Koether’s recent exhibition at Lévy Gorvy were cooler than you, quicker than you, smarter than you, better read than you, and not afraid to let you know. They moved between enough winking homages to keep professors busy for years: Fauvism, graffiti, Dürer, Ernst, Poussin, Stettheimer, Hartley. The massive Neuer Frau (2019) evoked almost all of these precedents and still found room for a portrait of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, with lips like wax candy and eyes a notch too close together. I’d been trying to come up with a more descriptive name than “sampling” for Koether’s approach to art history. Then I remembered the title of one of the paintings in the show: Some Esoteric Sipping.It’s a concise description of Koether’s paintings and of her career more generally. She was born in Cologne in 1958 and studied critical theory in Paris with Lacan. Where some rise to fame and fortune on the shoulders of one mentor/collaborator/rival, she had dozens: Sigmar Polke and Martin Kippenberger, both of whom she met in her twenties; Kim Gordon and Tony Conrad, with whom she’s performed music; and a host of old masters. The one trick Koether seems unwilling to learn, or admit she’s learned, is painterly refinement. Instead she opts for a faux-naïf kind of expressionism—or what she called, in a 2016 interview with Benjamin Buchloh, “a slightly exhilarating energy that emerged from the feeling of starting something from scratch.”Am I writing around Koether’s paintings? Probably, though it’s hard to say how else to proceed. Discussions of her work have tended toward the runic (from David Joselit’s 2009 essay “Painting Beside Itself”: “Instead of attempting to visualize the overall contours of a network, [Koether] actualizes the behavior of objects within networks by demonstrating what I would like to call their transitivity”), or have even gone Ono-esque (from Bob Nickas’s 2003 “How To Write About . . . Jutta Koether”: “Set out a cup of green tea and a ruled notebook”). Such indirect approaches are almost inevitable. To speak of Koether’s “style” seems misleading, since much of it consists of unlearning the skills she acquired while studying art at university. After a while in Lévy Gorvy, in fact, I couldn’t help but admire how successfully she’d managed to shield her work from anything resembling conventional virtuosity—she has a knack for pairing a hot color with an even hotter one until the whole thing seems lukewarm, and it’s a rare line of hers that doesn’t seem too short or too thick or too thin.Still, almost any formal characteristic of Koether’s work I can put my finger on is counterbalanced by another. The four large canvases on the gallery’s ground floor, all from 2019, were clothed in delicate, translucent brushstrokes of a kind found more often in smaller, more intimate works. Encore, which shows a woman standing at the center of a crowded opera-house-like space, has a cinematic sweep, but this quality is kept in check by the presence of a blue bow that binds near to far and reasserts the picture plane. The paintings on view raised important questions about what the medium can and should do. Some that came to mind as I walked out: What does it mean to sip one’s influences? What are the consequences of engaging with those influences primarily from an intellectual distance—of seeing so much of art history in quotation marks? What is to be gained by abandoning virtuosity for the thicket of remix and repetition? Might this not be a bad trade?Try as I might, I can’t shake the sense that Koether’s paintings are doing only a sliver of what they’re capable of doing. Too many of the canvases come smothered in cunningly misapplied pigment and vast stretches of bright, inert nothingness. Koether’s work seems premised on the idea that a certain amount of crudeness is essential to art’s power, but the show’s most powerful bits didn’t bother with this pretext. The lower right of Neuer Mann (2019), which depicts a man peeking out from behind a plant, features eloquent color harmonies and inspired embellishments (that checkerboard fabric! those eyes!). I wish Koether would paint like this more often—genuinely, surprisingly, without obscuring her inventions with feints and clever references.
ArtNews℗In Tender, Dignifying Portraits, Photographer Robert Giard Insisted That Gay and Lesbian Culture Was Worthy of Documentation℗Jameson Fitzpatrick℗ArtinAmerica℗28/04/2020℗℗Self-taught photographer Robert Giard is best remembered today for his distinctive black-and-white series “Particular Voices: Portraits of Gay and Lesbian Writers.” He was inspired to begin this body of work in the summer of 1985, after seeing two plays that depicted the unfolding AIDS crisis in the United States—Larry Kramer’s The Normal Heart and William Hoffman’s As Is. In the introduction to the 1997 Particular Voices book, which paired selected images from the series with short writings by their subjects, Giard wrote, “I had arrived at a decision about my work: that it should be of use to other gay people by recording something of note about our experience, our history, our culture.”This commitment to producing a visual archive of queer life animated “Uncanny Effects: Robert Giard’s Currents of Connection,” an exhibition at the Leslie-Lohman Museum of Art in New York. Curators Ariel Goldberg and Noam Parness succeeded both in relaying the extraordinary breadth of the “Particular Voices” project—which continued after the book’s publication and corresponding exhibition at the New York Public Library, comprising photographs of over six hundred writers at the time of Giard’s death in 2002—and in contextualizing Giard’s series in relation to his other work: portraits of artists and activists, nudes, still-lifes, and landscapes.Giard’s portraits tend toward the straightforward: many wouldn’t be out of place illustrating a magazine profile; the most conventional among them could easily double as headshots, and they sometimes did. The most striking portraits assembled in “Uncanny Effects” were those that offer a glimpse of their subjects in their homes or work spaces and, in doing so, reveal something about their personalities or preoccupations: painter Jane Kogan poses nude with one foot planted on the crossbar of a single-mast easel, her bent knee echoing the angle of its base; writer and scholar Melvin Dixon wraps one hand around a column as though embracing a loved one; San Francisco literary icon Kevin Killian, who died last year, sits on a couch surrounded by autographed headshots of cast members from the soap opera “Santa Barbara”; famed gay liberation and trans rights activist Sylvia Rivera smokes a cigarette in an easy chair, a row of stuffed animals peeking out from the crowded shelves behind her.But the impulse behind Giard’s portraits was never solely documentary, and to accept the photographs at face value is to miss his more ambitious aim: to insist that his subjects—and by extension, their experiences, histories, and cultures—were worthy of documentation. His gaze, at once dignifying and tender, is more romantic than anthropological. In a letter Killian sent Giard after receiving his copy of the Particular Voices book (quoted in the wall text accompanying his portrait), he writes admiringly of Giard’s “loving lens, which has made us all beautiful in some fine-tooth way.” Sarah Schulman’s own handwritten response to the book, pinned to a wall of correspondence and press clippings, wryly notes, “Even Andrea Dworkin has a hopeful quality.” Indeed, though there is a diversity of expressions, poses, and settings among them, what unifies Giard’s portraits—single, double, and group alike—is his almost beatific vision: the silver way light graces skin.The range of Giard’s subjects is also notable. “Particular Voices” highlights writers of various genres and aesthetic affiliations, from the mainstream to the margins, and while white writers constitute the majority of the subjects, Giard, who was himself white, photographed many writers of color for the series as well. (Despite naming only gays and lesbians in its subtitle, “Particular Voices” also includes some portraits of bisexual and trans writers. Giard’s provisional description of “Queer Views”—his final, unfinished effort to photograph early queer activists, for which he made the portrait of Rivera—explicitly names trans activists as a part of its scope.) Giard was dedicated to looking beyond his immediate social sphere for subjects and traveled extensively to shoot (though he lived at the far end of Long Island and did not drive), using his art practice as a way to build relationships and continually expand his network. In the Particular Voices book, he recounts how degrees of separation turned into new connections—for instance, a close friend introduced him to Assotto Saint, who, in turn, led him to Samuel R. Delany, Sapphire, and the Other Countries collective of black male writers. “This pattern would repeat itself,” he continues, “as one writer would lead me to others and I accumulated numerous scraps of paper bearing names, addresses, phone numbers, and book titles. Thus began the process of haunting the bookstores, reading the work of an author, communicating first by letter, eventually following this up with a phone call, setting a date, and finally traveling to the writer to make a portrait.”It’s an involved, antiquated method, the memory (or notion) of which the excellent ephemera in this exhibition made easier to conjure. While it’s impossible, in this moment of social distancing, not to be grateful for the wonders of digital technology, “Uncanny Effects” produced in me a nostalgia for a kind of queer sociality that I’ve never really known as an adult, for a time when to reach out to an author—or to read their work, or even to know what they looked like—required more than a quick click. Still, it seems right that so many of Giard’s portraits can be found online, where they remain accessible to the greatest number of viewers. His landscapes—austere images of the Hamptons in the off-season—might be more the mood now, but, ironically, you’d have to see them in person to truly appreciate the story they tell about isolation, absence, and presence.
ArtNews℗Why Is Donald Judd Considered a Sculptor?℗Christa Noel Robbins℗ArtinAmerica℗27/04/2020℗℗The space at the top of the escalator leading to the Museum of Modern Art’s sixth floor is typically a crowded gift shop. When I visited the museum in early March, that space had been transformed. Instead of art-related trinkets, posters, and postcards, there was a neat display of boxy pine furniture and carefully arranged books with monochrome covers. This was the introduction to “Judd,” the first retrospective dedicated to Donald Judd in the United States since 1988. The furniture pieces were his own designs, two large tables with matching chairs and a deep-seated bench. Placing such functional work at the entrance to the exhibition, curator Ann Temkin seemed to be positioning Judd’s practice in conversation with early avant-garde movements, such as Constructivism, Neoplasticism, and the Bauhaus, that challenged traditional distinctions between the fine and applied arts. Such a framing would make sense, since Judd, who did not identify as a sculptor, pushed against the convention of dividing the arts according to medium and use.Judd began making cleanly designed three-dimensional “objects” after abandoning painting in 1960. His stripped-down approach, along with that of artists like Anne Truitt, Frank Stella, and Robert Morris, helped to establish a new mode of art-making, which became known as Minimalism. In his influential 1965 essay “Specific Objects,” Judd, a prolific art writer, generated a vocabulary with which to describe and evaluate this new work, locating its primary divergence from modernist art in the difficult fact that it was “neither painting nor sculpture.” The works he discussed in “Specific Objects,” by artists including Jasper Johns, Robert Rauschenberg, Dan Flavin, and Yayoi Kusama, varied greatly in style and approach, as Judd himself pointed out, though they all demonstrated a tendency toward three-dimensionality and an open “objection” to painting and sculpture as meaningful classifications in their own right. Judd argued that “the best new work” being made in the early ’60s refused validation via stylistic or generic categorization. United in its avoidance of illusion and reference, the new work demanded an assessment of each specific work according to its specific circumstances.“Judd” offered a chance to view the artist’s pursuit of this idea over three decades. (He died in 1994.) Arranged chronologically, the exhibition presented groupings of works that roughly coincided with different phases in Judd’s career. The first room was dedicated to his earliest three-dimensional objects, which he made between 1960 and 1963: large wooden floor pieces and wall reliefs painted mainly in bright cadmium reds. Some of them were first featured in the 1963 solo show at the Green Gallery in downtown Manhattan that established Judd as a central figure in the generational shift away from modernism. While Judd quickly left behind the hand-painted, multipart compositions of such work in favor of more uniform, industrially manufactured designs, the main components of his later practice can be seen here. Works such as a low-lying object from 1963 that suggests a solid box with a triangular portion excised from its top, a purple piece of plexiglass installed across the diagonal slice, demonstrate his preferences for clean edges, eye-catching colors, and open spaces.In fact, as the viewer moved from the objects in the first room (made when Judd still had to rely on found materials and his own carpentry skills) to those that closed the show (blocky, polychromatic enameled-aluminum pieces fabricated by the Swiss manufacturer Lehni AG), what emerged was primarily a narrative about Judd’s expanding means of production. In other words, the exhibition did not so much track Judd’s developing sensibility or shifting conceptual concerns, as one might expect from a retrospective of an artist’s work, but, rather, showed his ability to access ever more refined materials and sophisticated industrial manufacturers. This isn’t necessarily a bad thing. The beautifully fabricated objects are impressive in their unvarying commitment to a handful of design principles, including the play between open and closed form, sensitivity to the specificity of material, and responsiveness to architectural space. This commitment, however, raises important questions concerning Judd’s status as a designer and the place of design more generally in the history of twentieth-century abstraction and avant-garde practice. And while Judd’s furniture greeted viewers before they entered the show and as they left—two of the artist’s “Wintergarden Benches,” designed in 1980, sat just outside the last room—these questions were left largely unexamined in the galleries. The exhibition catalogue, which includes essays on Judd’s longtime use of manufacturing companies as well as on his understanding of himself as a furniture designer and architect, offers important insight into the overlap between Judd’s roles as artist and designer. However, by restricting the exhibition proper to a chronological showing of his most gallery-friendly work, the retrospective offered a far-too-familiar portrait of Judd as the maker of slightly alienating abstract sculptures. Viewers can sense the ambiguity at the core of his work when it’s presented in a large survey like this, but the curatorial approach resisted that ambiguity, offering a more conventional picture of Judd as the maker of autonomous works of art and undermining the challenge posed by his redefinition of art as “objects.”While Judd has not had a retrospective in the US in three decades, his work is not difficult to come by. It can be found in permanent collections around the world and in frequent gallery shows and group exhibitions. Given the work’s ubiquity, one would expect a major retrospective to offer something new. Far from readying the audience to deal with the real implications of Judd’s category-defying, object-based approach to art-making—one that, as he put it in the 1965 essay, potentially “opens to anything”—this exhibition perpetuated the separation of Judd the designer from Judd the Minimalist, preventing any serious confrontation with the value systems that keep the two roles apart. This article appears under the title  “Donald Judd” in the May 2020 issue, pp. 69–70.
ArtNews℗Lauren Halsey’s Psychedelic Homage to South Central℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗23/04/2020℗℗Lauren Halsey’s exhibition at David Kordansky, her first at the gallery, took the form of a clamoring, abstracted cityscape: a funk apotheosis of South Central—or, as the city and its real estate developers now brand it, South Los Angeles. Rising from the prismatic silver vinyl that lined the gallery floor was a jumble of towering rectangular boxes hand-painted with the emblems of strip mall storefronts, their typical sun-bleached palettes replaced by a psychedelic one of neon colors and metallics. Three sides of Black Diamonds (all works 2020) riffed on polychrome murals from convenience stores and a bodybuilding gym, while the fourth depicted a globe, rotated to Africa, hovering above a gilt sphinx. In these sculptures, Halsey employed imagery drawn from both existing South Central storefront signage and historical examples found in archival photographs, celebrating the neighborhood where she was born and raised, which is now feeling the undertow of gentrification. With this in mind, the artist emphasized the area’s rich vernacular culture alongside its political history in monuments like Reparations Now + Welcome Family, a stacked pair of horizontal boxes painted with different signs on each side. One sign bore the statement REPARATIONS NOW! IN MEMORY OF OUR ANCESTORS, accompanied by a phone number; another advertised AFFORDABLE BLACK ART.Halsey, who studied architecture before turning to art, has often cited as an influence the radical Italian architecture collective Super Studio’s speculative designs of the 1960s and ’70s. (One 1969 proposal, Continuous Monument, imagined applying a uniform grid to the entire planet.) Her vision of the city in this installation was similarly speculative, distilling the urban landscape into an assortment of minimalist sculptures. In one untitled example, a simple five-foot-tall white block was decorated with a motif consisting of a gloriously manicured gold hand pinching a rose. The work was an abstraction of a salon: a mobile, exchangeable stand-in, based, like a Warhol “Brillo Box,” on surface packaging.Halsey’s approach, of course, risks aestheticizing the culture of South Central in a manner actually favorable to gentrification, but she counteracted this issue in a number of ways. In certain works, such as an untitled block clad with signs for predatory houses-for-cash schemes, she directly addressed the threats posed by gentrification. In addition, she incorporated details throughout the installation—figurines, Egyptian-themed trinkets, bottled incense named for Barack Obama and Mary J. Blige—that rooted her abstractions in a specific sense of place and spoke to an interest in community preservation and building. A foil-paneled monolith decked like a public notice board, with flyers for musicians, pictures of hairstyles, and handwritten ads, was spray painted with the statements COMMUNITY OWNED and BLK OWNED THANKS. In the exhibition’s centerpiece, Briccs 2—a long, templelike archway with crowd-pleasing walls of mirrored tile—graffiti of tiny pyramids and phrases such as FUBU (meaning “for us by us,” borrowed from the famous hip hop clothing brand) interrupted viewers’ reflections.Another, savvier strategy Halsey had for resolving the seeming contradiction of creating aesthetic objects intended to oppose cultural commodification was to impose conditions on the works’ circulation, stipulating that certain pieces could be sold only to people of color or to public institutions. Thus, while she packaged the aesthetics of South Central for the seemingly placeless “anywhere” of the white cube, Halsey strove to make even this act an exercise in the ethics of community ownership.
ArtNews℗Cheeto Face Masks and Chocolate Chip Soap: Ilana Harris-Babou's New Work Parodies Beauty and Wellness Culture℗David Everitt Howe℗ArtinAmerica℗21/04/2020℗℗Ilana Harris-Babou’s videos typically lampoon aspirational lifestyle trends associated with privileged consumer demographics, adopting the forms of instructional how-tos or brand promos—complete with soundtracks of generically upbeat music—on subjects like basement renovations, the “erotics” of cooking, and fictional product lines that betray histories of racial oppression. The home-furnishing store Restoration Hardware figured in two videos she contributed to last year’s Whitney Biennial. One of them, Human Design (2019), was inspired by an experience she had involving African wood carvings displayed at the company’s Manhattan flagship. Speaking with Document magazine, the artist mentioned that when she inquired about the carvings’ source, a sales associate replied, “We send team members out across the globe to find these one-of-a-kind objects,” and explained that they weren’t for sale. In other words, they were exotic curios from Africa used to enliven an otherwise staid retail space catering to upscale, largely white tastes. Pushing the situation to its humorous breaking point, Harris-Babou cast herself as CEO of a fictional interior design company who travels to Senegal to find her aesthetic roots for the benefit of her high-end clientele.For “Decision Fatigue,” her recent exhibition at Hesse Flatow, Harris-Babou turned her attention to the wellness industry. In the titular video (all works 2020), her mother, Sheila Harris, plays a self-help guru who touts things like Cheeto face masks, rose quartz facial rollers, and soaps containing junk food like chocolate chips. Sharing her “daily beauty routine” for activities like “not breastfeeding” and “eating a TV dinner,” she offers such illogical steps as washing down a dose of multivitamins with Pepsi and—for the aforementioned, stomach-churning mask—grinding Cheetos with a mortar and pestle into crumbs that can be spread (inefficiently) over the skin. Her processes take the dictum “You are what you eat” to the hysterical extreme by combining beauty products with the foodstuffs that make up many Americans’ diets. Of course, as with all of Harris-Babou’s work, there is a biting critique in this presentation, which highlights the absurdity of health and beauty standards that many people don’t have the resources or time to maintain.The video’s snack food and as-seen-on-TV gimmicks manifested in three-dimensional form in the gallery—as grotesque objects set on shelves and pedestals. An array of soaps was on display, including fake ones comprising resin bars with Cheetos, car air fresheners, and a flower suspended in them, as well as more proper, glycerin-based versions that emitted a treacly fragrance. The facial roller was a motif in various works, including Plant 4—a cacti-holding planter whose ceramic surfaces bear casts of the trendy beauty tool. Plant 5 is a ceramic pot embellished with casts of nail polish bottles and containing a Monstera deliciosa, or Swiss cheese plant—a signifier of a certain kind of eclectic, hip taste ubiquitous on Instagram. A group of paper collages, meanwhile, turned the orderly staging of store catalogues into nightmarish clutter. In Tub, for instance, cream-colored, coolly Brutalist-style bathtubs overlap in a suffocating mass. With deadpan humor, Harris-Babou skillfully transforms such objects of desire into monstrous manifestations of money and power.
ArtNews℗Kevin Jerome Everson's Timely Films Explore the Skills Involved in “Unskilled” Labor℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗20/04/2020℗℗Relevance is more easily claimed than earned. The concept of The Art We Need Now is built on a few rickety premises: “we” are all the same; we “need” art; art that can be enjoyed “now” is preferable to art that takes time to digest. I have no idea if anybody especially needs Kevin Jerome Everson’s films right now (I have to imagine most people in this pandemic would rather have an extra mask or two). But the recent showing of his work at Andrew Kreps coincided perfectly with the revival of a national conversation involving the clumsy euphemisms of labor—“essential” versus “nonessential,” “unskilled” versus “skilled”—that Everson has spent his career pulling apart.The exhibition centered on a pair of wonderfully sharp short films shot on 16mm and transferred to video, Westinghouse 1 and Westinghouse 3 (both 2019). Taken together, the films brought to mind the great historian E.P. Thompson’s claim that he was trying to “rescue” the working class from “the enormous condescension of posterity.” The claim itself might sound condescending—who says that workers need someone to rescue them, or that an academic is the right person for the job? The nearly two hundred films that Everson (himself a professor at the University of Virginia) has completed since the late 1990s confront similar ethical/aesthetic challenges: how to film workers without fetishizing work; how to study their behavior without risking a chilly remove that smacks of Taylorism.One strategy is to offer two nuances on the same subject. Both “Westinghouses,” which played simultaneously, on loop, on opposite walls, show a young black man, Everson’s cousin Derek Whitfield, ironing a white sheet, but 1 is black-and-white and three minutes long, while 3 is a slightly shorter color film. (Westinghouse 2, in which a young woman performs the same task, wasn’t included). The films’ differing lengths—as well as the six rubber “irons” displayed around the gallery space—prevented the exhibition from feeling like an exercise in symmetry for its own sake. The sense, instead, was of a vast, complex system of people and machines, of which Everson could show only a few fragments. A disturbing history lurks beneath the films’ boilerplate titles: Westinghouse Electric used to be the largest employer in Mansfield, Ohio, Everson’s birthplace, and its departure in 1990 did everything but rip the city apart. Yet the content of the films can be read as a cool rejoinder to this history and its smug assumptions about the workforce. Unskilled labor as performed by Whitfield is made up of a thousand tiny skills, so that, paradoxically, his ironing seems more unique with each repetition until it’s as singular, in its way, as an old master’s brushstroke.Paintings old and new have left their mark on these works. The spot-the-difference-puzzle approach is borrowed from Rauschenberg’s 1957 Factum diptych (previously an inspiration for Everson’s film Emergency Needs, from 2007), and when asked about his use of high-contrast black-and-white 16mm, which makes Whitfield’s skin almost indistinguishable from the shadows around him, Everson has praised the sinister-yet-emancipatory images of Kerry James Marshall. The enveloping darkness of Everson’s works also evokes the racist history of film lighting and processing, which in some cases diminished black figures on-screen to not much more than eyes and teeth. Here, though, you don’t get the sense that Whitfield is being erased by the camera so much as eluding it, refusing to simplify himself or his actions for the sake of a stranger’s gaze.All of which points to another ethical/aesthetic question, maybe the central one Everson’s films raise: who are they for? In the past, Everson has said he makes art for his subjects, not his audience, depicting them without giving into the pressure to explain or decode. The results have been challenging but, at their best, equal parts banal and magical—something like what the poet Les Murray meant when he wrote about “an absolutely ordinary rainbow”—though the more appropriate image, from Westinghouse 1, is of plain white cloth that seems almost to iron itself.
ArtNews℗Boiled Coca-Cola, Human Fat, Cigarette Ash: The Materially Driven Art of Contemporary China℗J. Howard Rosier℗ArtinAmerica℗15/04/2020℗℗By turns spectacular and taciturn, “The Allure of Matter: Material Art from China” presented viewers with an inordinate number of substances. Installations featuring familiar materials, such as pulped paper, concrete, and wood, shared the galleries with artworks employing silkworms, gunpowder, and resin from boiled Coca-Cola. The range of mediums produced jarring shifts in mood and tone: in Chen Zhen’s Crystal Landscape of Inner Body (2000), glass sculptures of human organs glisten on a table like the remnants of an autopsy, while in Zhang Huan’s drawing Seeds (2007), a pastoral farming scene rendered in incense ash projects quiet intensity. Despite their differences, the forty-eight works by twenty-six artists were connected, somewhat tenuously, by the curatorial premise that since the late 1980s, a dominant group of Chinese artists has allowed material choices to drive conceptual inquires. After its initial run at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, “The Allure of Matter” arrived in Chicago, where, owing partly to the large scale of many works, it was split between two venues: Wrightwood 659, a Tadao Ando–designed gallery space in Lincoln Park, and, on the opposite side of the city, the Smart Museum of Art at the University of Chicago. Wu Hung, an art history professor at the university who organized the exhibition with Smart curator Orianna Cacchione, coined the term caizhi yishu, or “Material art,” to identify an area of contemporary Chinese art that he argues is largely unexplored—a somewhat surprising claim, given that some of its practitioners, including gu wenda, Xu Bing, and Ai Weiwei, are counted among the most prominent artists working today. In his catalogue essay, Wu describes how Material art is the culmination of a rush of creative energy in the last decades of the twentieth century, as experimental artists sought to make up for time lost under the rigid constraints of the Cultural Revolution. After Mao’s death in 1976, Chinese artists had new opportunities to travel abroad, and there was an influx of previously unavailable translations of Western literature, philosophy, and art criticism. In contrast to the 1990s painting movements Political Pop and Cynical Realism—the first of which ironically recast icons from the Maoist era as commercial items, while the second applied canned antihero figural tropes to Chinese culture—Wu offers Material art as “a thoroughly cosmopolitan approach within contemporary Chinese art and a culturally informed regional approach within global contemporary art.” Rather than creating pictorial signifiers of Chinese identity, the resulting works “‘distill’ essential substances of traditional material culture . . . transform[ing] such shared cultural properties into a personalized visual language.”To identify a collective tendency underlying highly individualized practices, the curators constructed a taxonomy rather than a chronological overview of an artistic school. Many Material artists, for example, maintain a critical relationship with painting and other traditional art forms. Cai Guo-Qiang’s large-scale work on paper Mountain Range (2006) appears as delicate as a watercolor or gouache painting, belying the violence required to make it. A video across from Mountain Range showed the artist’s method of distributing gunpowder over his designs, placing fuses, and then covering the work and detonating the explosives. Liu Jianhua creates installations out of fine porcelain, a material so embedded in the history of China that, at least in the West, it is synonymous with the country. At the Smart, three porcelain sheets as thin as loose-leaf pages hung on the wall (Blank Paper, 2009–12). Invoking the tradition of monochrome painting, the work seemed to invite viewers to project their own ideas about “china.” The subtle, powerful piece provided a dramatic contrast with the artist’s floor-based installation at Wrightwood: Black Flame (2017), comprising eight thousand porcelain objects that resemble flames. Visitors tiptoed around the exquisitely fragile work as if avoiding open fire.While Wu and Cacchione acknowledged 1960s precedents like Arte Povera in Italy, process art in the United States, and Mono-ha in Japan, they avoided an overarching East-West dichotomy, preferring instead to examine global dialogues through specific works, an approach exemplified by the presentation of Xu Bing’s work at the Smart. Tobacco became an important medium for the artist after he received, in 2000, a commission from Duke University, where he researched the school’s historical ties to the tobacco industry, which generates massive revenue selling cigarettes in China. Xu’s 1st Class (2011), an installation resembling a tiger-skin rug but constructed out of some half-million cigarettes, emitted tobacco aromas that wafted through the space. A glass case nearby contained a related work: Traveling Down the River (2011), a facsimile of a Song dynasty hand scroll marked by a long trail of cigarette ash. Displayed in another case was Tobacco Book (2011), for which Xu printed English text describing the expansion of the American Tobacco Company in China on cured tobacco leaves that had been ravaged by beetles. If Xu’s work was a subtle investigation of material culture, other pieces in the show were geared toward sensational material effects. Sun Yuan and Peng Yu’s 2001/19 sculptural column rendered using human fat extracted via liposuction relies on its title, Civilization Pillar, to convey a critical perspective. In a similar vein, gu wenda’s united nations: american code (1995–2019)—a tent constructed entirely of ropes of human hair dyed in rainbow colors—uses bodily remains to give an aura of authenticity to a vision of transnational togetherness.The uneven applicability of the Material art premise to the works on view spoke to the curators’ refusal to choose between the prescriptive (“This is what Material art is”) and the descriptive (“This is what Material artists make”). Wu and Cacchione wanted to stress the individuality of each artist’s practice while simultaneously advancing a new historical category that’s at once in dialogue with global trends and distinct from Western contemporary art. The resultant confusion in the exhibition clouded an otherwise laudatory effort. Liang Shaoji’s Chains: The Unbearable Lightness of Being, Nature Series, No. 79 (2002–07) is a group of hanging chains that look ghostlike, having been coated with fibroin produced by live silkworms. Wang Jin uses plastic sheets to construct reproductions of Qing dynasty imperial robes and traditional opera costumes. To characterize the two projects as part of the same phenomenon serves to obscure their core differences. Liang is essentially a steward; having removed himself from the equation, his material constructs the work as his proxy. Wang actively imposed a position and deployed his material to support his case. They both “use” materials, but only the former appears to be driven primarily by its allure. One gets the sense that the phrases “Material Art” and “from China” in the show’s subtitle are almost at odds with each other. An emphasis on materiality might have been better elucidated by comparisons with Western and Japanese counterparts. Or a pivotal era in Chinese art could have been defined more sharply with historical context. Regardless, “The Allure of Matter” challenged visitors to see the diversity and range in the works on view. Further, hardly content with merely documenting Chinese practices for a Western audience, the curators offered an aesthetic argument that, however muddled in places, appeared to transcend national identity as well as issues of representation.  This article appears under the title  “'The Allure of Matter'” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 73–74.
ArtNews℗“Gerhard Richter: Painting After All” Foregrounded a Question at the Heart of Richter's Practice: “Why Paint?”℗Rachel Wetzler℗ArtinAmerica℗13/04/2020℗℗The first thing I encountered in “Gerhard Richter: Painting After All” was not in fact a painting, but my own reflection, or something like it: a blurred form thrown back at me by 11 Panes (2004), a stack of green glass panels propped upright against a wall. Placed across from the elevator bank in the foyer to the exhibition, the work made the defamiliarizing confrontation with one’s own distorted image a condition of entry. Flanking it were two small paintings that would seem to belong to opposite poles of the artist’s career. Table (1962), made the year after Richter emigrated from East to West Germany, is a dour grayscale rendering of a table, transcribed from a photograph in the Italian design magazine Domus. At the center of the canvas is an abstract whorl, where Richter smeared his depiction with paint thinner: a kind of double cancellation that takes aim at both his Socialist Realist training and the presumed interiority of the gestural mark. The other painting, September (2005), is based on a photograph of the plane hitting the second tower of the World Trade Center on 9/11, the artist undercutting the source image’s spectacular quality by building up layers of paint and scraping them away, leaving only a silvery blue blur of sky and smoke.Triangulating disparate works, this opening salvo set the tone for the exhibition, a dense, decidedly idiosyncratic survey of the artist’s six-decade-long career. Though the show—co-curated by Richter’s longtime interlocutor, Harvard art historian Benjamin H.D. Buchloh, and the Metropolitan Museum’s Sheena Wagstaff—occupied two entire floors of the Met Breuer and included roughly one hundred works from the 1960s to the present, it was not, in any real sense, a retrospective. (This was evident in the almost polemical omission of several of Richter’s best-known paintings, including October 18, 1977, a 1988 cycle based on press photographs depicting the imprisonment and death of members of the Red Army Faction, a German left-wing extremist group.) Instead of tracing a linear path through Richter’s oeuvre, the show seemed to double back on itself halfway through: the display on the second floor unfolded as a chromatic and thematic echo of the first, down to the inclusion of a mirror work at its entrance (Mirror, 1986). Both floors intermingled works from all periods of Richter’s career, beginning with galleries devoted to his early gray paintings, moving through his exploration of the conventional genres of landscape and portraiture, and ending with luridly colored abstraction. This recursive structure emphasized an underlying consistency in Richter’s work: in spite of his confounding formal pivots, from photorealism to the monochrome to gestural abstraction and back again, a set of questions has remained more or less constant from the outset. Chief among them is: why paint? As its ambiguous title suggested—painting after all this; still painting, after all—the show foregrounded the fundamental dialectic that plays out across all Richter’s work, between doubt about painting’s purpose and faith that it’s worth doing anyway.The implicit corollary to the question “why paint?” is how to do so as a German born in 1932. The exhibition’s first gallery was largely given over to what are arguably still Richter’s most significant works, the gray photo paintings of the 1960s, though they were refracted here through a new sculptural installation, House of Cards (5 Panes), 2020, an homage to Richard Serra composed of tilted planes of glass balanced against one another. After painting deadpan copies of photographs sourced from both mass media and family albums, Richter raked over the canvases while they were still wet to produce their characteristic blur, an effect that paradoxically registers both the mechanical nature of the original images—by mimicking a technical flaw endemic to photography—and the handcraft of his works’ execution, the paint made legible through its disruption. Offering the same treatment to an image of his uncle posing in a Wehrmacht uniform (Uncle Rudi, 1965) as to an image of a nondescript bit of furniture (Kitchen Chair, 1965), Richter seems to link Germany’s postwar “memory crisis”—its disavowal of the recent Nazi past—and the vacuous spectacle of postwar consumer culture he confronted upon arriving in the capitalist West.Richter approaches German history obliquely—as a dark specter hovering over even the most seemingly innocuous images—in much of his work, including the landscapes he has painted intermittently since the 1960s. In the monumental five panel Alps (1968), he rendered a panoramic mountain scene in thick, gestural passages of black and white impasto, debasing an emblem of national strength with AbEx pastiche. Two striking landscapes, Iceberg in Mist (1982) and Ice (1981), as technically dazzling as Alps is ungainly, mine the German Romantic tradition of Caspar David Friedrich, their soft-focus blurs blunting any sense of sublime transcendence.Both floors of the exhibition culminated in galleries devoted to late cycles of large scale abstract canvases in which Richter manipulated the paint with a squeegee, a tool he first employed in the 1980s. As the squeegee passes over the canvas adding new paint, it scrapes away previous layers, producing stuttered, striated palimpsests that record the process of the work’s own making, even if that process is largely one of erasure. The six paintings in the first series, “Cage” (2006), an homage to John Cage’s chance procedures, oscillate between exuberance and constraint: composed primarily of horizontal and vertical squeegeed marks, they are streaked with passages of bright green, yellow, and red, which variously peek through and overtake nets of silvery gray.The series finds a dark parallel in “Birkenau” (2014), placed in the show’s last gallery, in which Richter finally makes explicit the theme he has circled around for his entire career. Comprising four paintings and four inkjet-printed digital replicas, the series is based on photographs of the gas chambers at Auschwitz-Birkenau taken surreptitiously by a prisoner in 1944. Though the photographs had long preoccupied Richter—in the 1960s, he included one in his “Atlas,” the ongoing collection of images he draws on as source material for his paintings—it was only relatively recently that he decided to approach them directly. After a year of trying and failing to adequately commit the photographs of the camps to canvas, he painted over the initial attempts, repeatedly adding layers of paint and then aggressively scraping them away until the images disappeared, replaced by black, scabrous surfaces punctuated with smears of red and green. In the exhibition, shockingly, copies of the original photographs accompanied the paintings, an inclusion that seemed both provocative and self-negating, as if a preemptive acknowledgment of the work’s inherent limits. If the “Birkenau” paintings fail on their own, they shed important light on Richter’s entire project, making clear that his ruthless skepticism about the medium is matched by an unstinting commitment to it.
ArtNews℗In Agnes Pelton’s Ebullient Paintings, the Cosmos Is Flush with Gentle Energy℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗10/04/2020℗℗In 1932, at age fifty, Agnes Pelton, moved from Long Island to the desert town of Cathedral City, California, and, shortly thereafter, witnessed a great storm. She captured her impressions in the painting Sand Storm (1932), in which a rainbow arcs over abstracted palm fronds as the bulbous rays of a blue flower-shaped sun pierce the dirty yellow atmosphere. Given Pelton’s distinctly ebullient artistic style, the rainbow appears not as a chance collision of sunlight and mist, but as evidence of nature’s essential benevolence. Such optimism might be one reason that viewers in our anxious era have responded so positively to Pelton’s work. Seen through her eyes, the cosmos is flush with gentle energy, and no desert is empty. As with desolation, life, time, and inspiration, so with benevolence: look for it, and it abounds.Forty-five of the German-born, Brooklyn-raised artist’s paintings were on view at the Whitney Museum in “Agnes Pelton: Desert Transcendentalist.” Organized by Gilbert Vicario at the Phoenix Art Museum, where it debuted, the show was the first solo exhibition of her work since a 1995–96 touring retrospective. Pelton, who died in 1961, was not unknown in her time: she exhibited her early, Symbolist-style “Imaginative Paintings” at the 1913 Armory Show; participated in a 1940 Guggenheim Museum exhibition of the Transcendental Painting Group, a late 1930s and ’40s New Mexico–based coterie of which she was a remote member; and showed extensively in the Southwest. But she has largely fallen to the wayside of history. Pelton lived a modest, isolated life. The Great Depression and World War II left as few marks on her paintings as on the sun-blessed vistas she loved. Her paintings are escapist, to be sure. But they are also rooted in a modern spiritualism, like the work of Hilma af Klint before her and the work of another desert-based Agnes, the monkish Minimalist Agnes Martin, after. Pelton’s ethos, like af Klint’s, evolved from Theosophy, a brand of American esoteric thought that emerged in the late nineteenth century and cherry-picked aspects of shamanism, astrology, and Eastern religion. “Desert Transcendentalist” argued that her paintings are at once illustrations of her spiritual views and an important contribution to modernist art.At the Whitney, the exhibition was divided roughly chronologically into three galleries. The first featured mostly paintings that predated Pelton’s move to California, though it also contained the pivotal Sand Storm and a handful of works she made in the subsequent years. Paintings like Being (1926) and Ecstasy (1928)—busy displays of cascading colors and curving or angular forms—betray a significant debt to Kandinsky and lack compositional focus. Soon, however, Pelton was pursuing a bolder, more successful aesthetic defined by symmetrical pictures in which nonobjective or semiabstract forms sprout up from the bottom like plants. In the particularly austere Star Gazer (1929), a closed flower bud encased in a kind of celestial jar stretches toward a lodestar. In such works, landscapes began to structure the artist’s otherworldly visions—a hallmark of her mature style.Allegories of birth, death, rebirth, and divine order appeared throughout the show, but the second gallery, painted dark blue, housed especially elegant examples. These works tended to be spare in the manner of Star Gazer, with a nocturnal palette and one or two central symbolic motifs. A luminous egg shape floating in a column of light between rolling hills and a cloudscape dominates the composition of Light Center (1947–48). In Birthday (1943), an anthropomorphic form that resembles a limbed figure eight suspended from an umbilical cord descends headfirst toward a star-studded firmament. Orbits (1934) depicts what seems to be a plume of deep space rising in an earthly twilight sky. Within the inky expanse, seven varicolored stars appear strung on their orbital paths like charms on necklaces.The works in the final gallery exhibited a stunning synthesis of occult symbolism, geometric abstraction, and desert iconography. A handful of them portrayed motifs of ascendance: for instance, a chorus of cottony figural forms riding a surge of light in The Blest (1941), and a trio of cogs journeying into the bright yellow sky above a mesa in Prelude (1943). Pelton also exhibited and sold relatively conventional landscapes throughout her life. While none were shown at the Whitney, her aptitude for such work was evident in a handful of paintings on view, including a late one installed in this gallery, Idyll (1952), in which a skillfully rendered, realistic Mojave landscape provides the setting for two hallucinatory arcs of red and green. Similarly, Return (1940), displayed in the first gallery, offers a somewhat standard portrayal of a windswept oasis, despite the mildly surreal palm tree bending at the composition’s right edge and the ethereal phoenix holding a star in its beak. Such range points to something at the heart of Pelton’s practice: she found painting to be as generous as she did the desert. In her work, pictorial visions bloom from painted grounds like the smell of creosote bush after a desert rain.—Travis Diehl
ArtNews℗"Uncanny Valley" Advocates a Sensual Understanding of Digital Life℗Brian Karl℗ArtinAmerica℗09/04/2020℗℗While there has been a slew of museum shows in recent years devoted to art in the digital era, few have grappled with the vast, less visible technological undercurrents impacting cultural production, social values, and political realities. “Uncanny Valley: Being Human in the Age of AI,” scheduled to be on view at San Francisco’s de Young Museum through October 25, warns against becoming more and more dependent on artificial intelligence technologies we do not fully understand. Alluding to nearby Silicon Valley—where various versions of the future have been innovated, disrupted, and broken for decades—the exhibition’s title also points to a series of cultural figures that have yet to be fully understood and imaginary landscapes already emerging as different, strange kinds of reality.The exhibition, comprising work by thirteen individual artists and collectives, begins with a four-channel video installation about Bina48, a humanoid robot bust. In Conversations with Bina48 (2014–), Stephanie Dinkins documents her interactions with the android, which is modeled to look like a black woman. (Bina48’s appearance is based on a real person: the co-founder of Terasem Movement, a private foundation promoting maximum extensions of human life). The robot exhibits almost human expressions and movements (which Dinkins mirrors during her interactions), as well as a tendency toward delivering monologues and lectures. The videos’ demonstration of the flawed robotic limits of this humanoid design is a reminder of how assimilated AI has become into everyday life via stealthy software systems, most of which don’t try to emulate human forms. Bina48’s apparent gender and race also highlight how unchecked biases have affected the choices made by humans encoding such systems to date.Martine Syms’s Mythiccbeing and Threat Model (both 2018) put forth deliberately awkward performances of black femininity. In Mythiccbeing the artist’s computer-generated avatar maneuvers in virtual space on a large video screen. The monitor is set inside Threat Model, a wall-mounted vinyl graphic that outlines a risk-assessment map for network security. Instead of injunctions related to computer concerns, Syms’s map features incendiary phrases—e.g., “Rich PPL…WHAT DO I OWE EM?” “HE’S GOING TO GRAB MY BOOTY”—that evoke social stakes and pressures. The map also has a phone number and an invitation to send a text to it, in order to communicate with a chatbot named Teeny. In her responses, Teeny announces a disinterest in what humans have to say. Syms’s work refuses to gratify stereotypical expectations of either the vulnerability of her own black body or the validity of commercial AI’s claims of greater responsiveness to human wishes. It reiterates a point already raised by Dinkins’s performance awkwardly imitating an already awkward robot, namely: avatars and bots not only mirror human likenesses, limitations, and distortions but also help propagate them.While works by Syms and Dinkins undermine AI's anthropocentricism by pointing to ruptures in interactions with robots, Lawrence Lek’s animated movie Aidol (2019) expands the same theme in narrative. With darkly seductive video-game graphics, the 90-minute animation tells the surprisingly poignant story of Diva, a fading human pop singer who cuts a deal with a bot to sift through her back catalog to synthesize a new hit. One recurrent theme of “Uncanny Valley” is the insidiousness of programs that generate human culture. In Aidol, the bot and the human debate the relative merits of originality and consistency, thus presenting machine-learning algorithms as an exacerbation of the long-simmering antagonism between humans and their inventions. This rivalry centers on the issue of generating new art by mining already existing content, reminding us how formulas and archetypes underlie all cultural production, even as the machining of culture continues to accelerate.Other works in the show address political issues head on. Some even attempt interventions. Forensic Architecture’s video Triple Chaser (2019), projected large, details the development of AI systems to track munitions used against civilians around the world. Across the room, in the group’s installation Synthetic Images: Extreme Objects (2020), 3D-printed models are arrayed on a narrow table. These are produced from specifications of actual munitions, and physically manifest the animated versions seen in the video.The centerpiece of Lynn Hershman Leeson’s Shadow Stalker (2018–) is a touchscreen console that asks visitors to input their email addresses into an unseen computer. Visitors entering a small red square on the floor trigger motion sensors, projecting their bodies’ outlines onto surrounding walls as bright moving silhouettes filled with freshly mined personal data: names, street addresses, and places of employment associated with the provided emails. It is disturbing to witness the vulnerability of half-aware users willingly providing not only their data but also their bodies for imaging. The ease with which both types of profiling are generated in real time provides a stark visualization of how we are all dangerously surveilled, demonstrating that our identities have already been replicated as diminished, ethereal versions.In Hito Steyerl’s City of Broken Windows (2018), large-print quotes from economics and social theory texts fill a gallery’s walls, its floor-to-ceiling windows, and some painted fake windows, all arranged around two videos installed opposite each other. One video documents the volunteers who paint decorative boards to cover broken windows in poor neighborhoods of Camden, New Jersey, while the other depicts exuberant human testers training an AI system to detect the sound of breaking glass and alert authorities to intruders. The “broken window” profiling theory, which insists on policing small signs of disorder, is complicated by Steyerl’s more nuanced analysis of how breaks in physical buildings can be repaired to benefit the social fabric.While turning back and forth to watch Steyerl’s two videos and walking the perimeter of the gallery to read the selected texts, viewers are confronted with her arguments in several modes of perception. As the number of online interactions increases at an accelerated rate, whether or not we’re aware of them, “Uncanny Valley” makes a case for the importance of physical, sensual experience for understanding our digital life. The immersion and cross-talk of Steyerl’s piece—as with the work of many of the other artists in the show—overcome the easy distancing produced by clicking a mouse and the distractions of the endless streaming possibilities offered by our too-smart-for-our-own-good AI-enabled technologies.
ArtNews℗Two Steve McQueen Exhibitions in London Show His Commitment to the Ostracized, the Ignored, and the Colonized℗Kaya Genç℗ArtinAmerica℗02/04/2020℗℗In the past two decades, artist-filmmaker Steve McQueen has achieved Hollywood success with movies that draw on the spirit of video art—a rare feat. His Academy Award–winning 12 Years a Slave (2013) was an adaptation of the 1853 memoir of Solomon Northup—a freeborn man who, in his thirties, was kidnapped and sold into slavery—that employed disjointed editing schemes and overlapping sound design, stylistic devices associated more with experimental film than with mainstream movies. At the same time, the works McQueen makes for the gallery have a cinematic quality. He won the Turner Prize in 1999 for a group of films that critiqued the invisibility of black identity in cinema and reflected on his own identity as the son of working-class immigrants from the Caribbean island of Grenada who settled in west London. In Deadpan (1997), for instance, McQueen restaged an iconic stunt from Buster Keaton’s 1928 silent film Steamboat Bill, Jr., in which Keaton manages to walk away unscathed after the facade of a house falls over him during a storm.McQueen’s retrospective at Tate Modern comprised fourteen works that demonstrated his commitment to the ostracized, the ignored, and the colonized. Projected on the museum’s facade, one channel of the twenty-nine-minute two-channel film Caribs’ Leap (2002) features Edenic views of islanders in Grenada enjoying a swim, seemingly oblivious to the camera filming them. In the second channel, shown on a screen in the exhibition, figures fall endlessly against a blue backdrop that resembles both sea and sky, the footage evoking an episode from the history of the island, which was colonized by the French in 1650 and ceded to the British in 1763 before gaining independence in 1973. The eponymous Caribs’ Leap is a tall cliff overlooking the Caribbean Sea from which Grenada’s Indigenous Caribs leapt to their death rather than surrendering to the invading French. As McQueen told Rolling Stone in a 2014 interview, he has long been fixated on the way the Caribs “transcended themselves” through the act. In the video, the history of the Caribs seems to seep into the present time, making clear that Grenadan identity continues to be defined by colonial history.Some works in the exhibition were screened to small groups of people every half-hour, requiring viewers to queue in advance; no entry was allowed mid-screening. One such work was 7th Nov. (2001), and the immersive, communal viewing conditions—which resembled those of cinema screenings rather than typical presentations of video art—heightened its harrowing quality. The piece is a twenty-three-minute slide projection of a single 35mm photograph of McQueen’s cousin Marcus lying on his back, displaying a scar on his head, with a voice-over monologue in which Marcus describes how he accidentally shot his brother while trying to engage the safety on his gun. The work’s title is the date of his brother’s death. The discordance between the static slide on-screen and the avalanche of vivid images evoked in the monologue—from the victim’s cheerful arrival at Marcus’s apartment to the police raid in which Marcus is detained as a murder suspect—echoes the tension between action and stasis that Marcus experienced during the ordeal.There is a striking contrast between the stillness of 7th Nov. and the dizzying motion of Static (2009), a defamiliarizing portrait of the Statue of Liberty shot from a circling helicopter. The loud whirring of helicopter blades and the close-up shots of the statue’s surface produce a sense of anxiety, giving the film militaristic overtones. Shot from New York Harbor following the Statue of Liberty’s reopening after it had been closed since the 9/11 attacks, Static captures signs of structural decay and bird-shit stains marring the purported symbol of American freedom, a reminder of the Islamophobia, racism, and policing of US borders that followed the terror attacks.The show’s sole sculpture, Weight (2016), reimagines Oscar Wilde’s metal prison bed at Reading Gaol (now HM Prison Reading), where Wilde was incarcerated in 1895 after a London court found him guilty of “gross indecency”—a charge referring to sexual activity between men. A gold-plated mosquito net surrounding the metal bed brought to mind Wilde’s aphorism “We are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars.” Wilde wrote some of his best works from his prison cell, such as De Profundis (1897) and The Ballad of the Reading Gaol (1897), articulating the conflicting pressures of self-expression and social marginalization. Juxtaposing the glittering gold net with the squalid prison bed, the sculpture—first displayed in a Reading prison cell in 2016 to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the decriminalization of homosexuality in Britain—serves to remind viewers of the contested nature of British identity.In conjunction with the Tate Modern show, Tate Britain presented an installation of McQueen’s Year 3 project (2019), which comprises 3,128 photographs of third-grade classes at state, faith-based, independent, and special schools across London. The images, shot by Tate photographers, capture roughly two thirds of London’s population of seven- and eight-year-olds. Originally presented on billboards across London in November 2019, they lined the gallery walls at Tate Britain at much smaller scale. The sociological portraits register how class and race affect London’s youth: some of the uniforms are visibly nicer, some classrooms are more multiracial. While certain critics have written off the project as a feel-good effort that nods at these issues without engaging with their structural causes, McQueen’s photographs poignantly highlight the social and political knots that the young Londoners will face in the coming decades. As these children make their way in the world, how many of them will suffer discrimination? Who will flourish thanks to their privileged beginnings? How will the social forces of Brexit Britain shape their lives? With McQueen’s trademark subtlety, the portraits ask viewers to reckon with Britain’s future.
ArtNews℗The Legacy of Golam “Daddy” Kasem, the Father of Bangladeshi Photography℗Rahel Aima℗ArtinAmerica℗30/03/2020℗℗One of the most arresting images in Drik’s exhibition of works from the archive of legendary Bangladeshi photographer Golam Kasem, known as Daddy, was a black-and-white shot from 1922 in which a woman is seen from behind, thigh-deep in water and wrangling a fishing net as a boat bobs in the background. Printed from a fractured glass negative and spiderwebbed with cracks, the image suggests desiccated earth or dehydrated winter skin, an effect at odds with the subject matter.Kasem, who died in 1998 at age 104, is considered the father of Bangladeshi photography. Born in 1894, in what was then the British Raj, he took up photography as a teenager, buying his first box camera in 1912. Though Kasem was a lifelong amateur—the exhibition text notes that he was in his nineties when he sold his first photograph—he was instrumental in the formation of Bangladesh’s photography scene. In a typewritten statement from 1990, placed in a vitrine of archival ephemera at the center of the exhibition, Kasem recounts being rebuffed repeatedly by the professional photographers from whom he sought advice early in his career. Determined to share his hard-won skills, Kasem devoted his life, as he wrote, to “imparting knowledge of photography to others.” He set up the country’s first photography organization, the Camera Recreation Club, in 1962. His scholarly achievements (such as publishing the first anthology of Bangladeshi photography in 1964), decades of mentorship, and collective approach to photography that emphasized both education and access earned him the nickname “Daddy,” which is now treated as a de facto surname.The show focused on Kasem’s work of the early and mid-twentieth century, with many photographs dating from the 1920s. A number of them were softly lit formal portraits, the subjects posed barefoot outside against a plaid or slightly sheer black cloth. The results couldn’t be further from the Western anthropological-colonial portraits of the era. Those images show subjects with stiff carriages and guarded eyes, while in Kasem’s portraits, the postures are looser, even slouchy, in a way that suggests he had an easy rapport with the people he photographed. My Colleague (1935), a portrait of a man on the verge of a smile, is a study in jovial bonhomie, while A Close-Up Portrait (1922) beautifully portrays a man whose irises are clouded over by cataracts, seemingly captured mid-reverie.Most magical, however, were the snapshots, particularly those of children, whom he photographed with a remarkable emotional depth. In Her First Dance (1926), for instance, a little girl wobbles into the limelight with all the awkward grace of a newborn foal, as her admiring family looks on. Friends (1948), in which a toddler bellies up to a small dog standing on its hind legs, was delightfully paired with Woman with Her Dog (1928), an image of a grinning sari-clad woman play-fighting with a large dog, similarly balanced on its hind legs, on a lawn lined with banana trees.There is no overt political commentary in Kasem’s photographs, but given the recent violently repressive climate in Bangladesh—the gallery’s founder, Shahidul Alam, was jailed for several months in August 2018 for expressing support for protesters online—it’s hard not to read it here anyway. Three photographs of religious buildings—a temple (1929), a mosque (1959), and a church (1924), respectively, each doubled by its reflection in a body of water—were hung side by side on one wall. Clustered together, they seem to mourn the pluralism, dealt a blow by Partition, that is under attack again today, as the current regime slides toward dictatorship.
ArtNews℗The Psychic Heft of Nathaniel Mary Quinn's Disfigured Portraits℗Jeremy Lybarger℗ArtinAmerica℗27/03/2020℗℗Nathaniel Mary Quinn’s life has been as disjointed as one of his paintings. He was raised in a housing project on Chicago’s South Side, the youngest of five boys. When he was in the eighth grade, an assistant principal recognized his talent and helped get him into an elite boarding school in Indiana. While Quinn was there, his mother died, possibly of a stroke. (He incorporated her name, Mary, into his own.) Shortly after, he returned to Chicago for Thanksgiving, only to find his apartment empty and his family gone. He’d been abandoned at age fifteen.You don’t need to know this biography to appreciate Quinn’s art, but once you do, his disfigured portraits take on psychic heft. As his exhibition at Rhona Hoffman (all works 2019 or 2020) demonstrated, Quinn chases existential themes—time, memory, the slipperiness of identity—in an inventive style that riffs on Cubism, Expressionism, and collage. If Quinn’s jumbled faces recall Francis Bacon’s, or if his voluptuous mouths evoke those in Wangechi Mutu’s work, that’s part of their recombinant allure. He ransacks fashion magazines, family photos, the internet, and other sources for material that he then remixes into composite portraits. Instead of being representational, Quinn’s art is dense and suggestive, conjuring people whose moods change depending on the viewer’s own.Although Quinn’s faces look collaged, they’re actually made with oil, paint stick, gouache, and pastel, usually against a plain colored background. He works intuitively but methodically, without preliminary sketches, rendering his source material on canvas with no particular subject in mind. The final pictures suggest the results of an exquisite-corpse-like approach, whereby a number of people each slap a random element—an eye, a backwards chin—wherever they choose. Other artists might easily botch such a style, but Quinn achieves a graceful disorder that conveys unexpected emotion. In Hard to Believe She’s A Mom, Now, a cloud of black hair fills the frame and surrounds a cinched face marked by luscious lips, a patchwork nose, and a single sultry eye. At twelve by nine inches, the work invites intimacy. Its tone could read as tender, stoic, or erotic—an ambiguity that underlies most of Quinn’s portraits.That ambiguity often resolves into dignity. In Caught Between a Rock and a Hard Place, a man regards the viewer straight-on, his face a jigsaw of misaligned features and inflated lips. Despite this dissonant appearance, something about the man’s staring eye and upright posture commands respect. A Good Man, whose bearded subject lacks discernible eyes but who has that familiar overripe mouth, imparts a similar sense of pride or indomitability. Lights Out, a portrait of a young black girl, feels more melancholy, perhaps because the subject’s eyes are partially obscured with daubs of paint, and the overall palette is more earthen and subdued. That Moment with Mr. Laws portrays an older man in a sweater and collared shirt, his mouth resembling a crooked cut of beef, and his face looking almost inside out with its raw colors and glistening contusions.At their best, Quinn’s portraits achieve a disjunctive clarity, the shattered faces appearing to belong to whole people. He pulled off this magic trick most dramatically in the exhibition’s two largest works. The three-by-three-foot Apple of Her Eye depicts a man in a leather jacket posed against a mucus-green backdrop. The lower half of his face is a turtleneck of meat that swallows the upper half, which is a riot of smudged colors with an earlike orifice. The other large-scale work, From There to Here, is a diptych, its two panels framed separately. The left-hand one features a man whose face recalls a bulldog’s, and whose outfit is rather flamboyant: boxing glove, floppy-brimmed fedora, silk pants, and a fur stole. The right-hand image is smaller (sixteen by thirteen inches) and shows a grayscale silhouette representing the shadow of the adjacent colorful character. This work is perhaps a metaphor for Quinn’s split life, his own incongruous before and after.
ArtNews℗Jean-Jacques Lequeu Channeled Revolutionary Fervor into Fantastical Architecture and Transgressive Erotica℗Ian Volner℗ArtinAmerica℗24/03/2020℗℗Something is missing from the Morgan Library & Museum’s showing of the exhibition “Jean-Jacques Lequeu: Visionary Architect”: a suite of ink-wash images in which the eighteenth-century artist and builder manqué renders himself—a fat-faced, saucer-eyed Frenchman—dressed variously as a woman and as a little girl, staring expectantly at the viewer. The absence of Lequeu’s transvestite portraits, which are among the designer-draftsman’s most celebrated works, and of most of his explicit depictions of the human anatomy is conspicuous, the more so since many of these works were present in the show’s original iteration, at the Petit Palais in Paris in 2018–19. Seemingly an odd sideline for a trained architect, Lequeu’s sexual image-making is in fact key to his legacy, evidence of an artistic project sparked by revolution but ultimately, as architectural historian Anthony Vidler has written, “carried out in his bedroom.”Lequeu’s life was marked by failure and frustration. Born in Rouen in 1757, he studied and worked in Paris before the Revolution, attaching himself to François Soufflot (nephew of the famed architect of the Panthéon), but besides the facade of a single hôtel particulier, it does not appear that Lequeu ever saw his own designs realized. He spent most of his career as a minor bureaucrat. Swept up in the turbulent events of 1789, Lequeu threw in with the revolutionaries, only to see his professional advance thwarted again, forcing him into retreat in his Right Bank flat and into a practice that combined the fervor of revolutionary belief with crankish solipsism. Fantastic proposal followed fantastic proposal: unrealizable monuments and civic temples, hermitages and altars and belvederes, as well as the irresistibly weird erotica, though after his death in 1826, this transgressive corpus was more or less consigned to oblivion.With Lequeu finally restored to something like the historical mainstream, it seems a shame to put so much of his work back in the closet. However, what is on display is quite astonishing enough: for instance, a design for a tomb for the Athenian orator Isocrates comprising a carefree-looking mermaid astride a giant stone sheep, or an Indian pagoda, complete with a dome to be shaped—as the architect describes it—like “country fruit.” A proposal for Lequeu’s own funerary shrine, a subterranean complex to be topped with a sculpture of the architect’s tools, bears a paper tab that can be lifted to reveal an alternative scheme for a massive cross, symbolic of the artist’s sufferings in the world of men. Worth the price of admission alone is Grotto of the Oceanids, an undated drawing of a kind of soggy basilica dripping with stalactites and drenched by shimmering cascades, as if Robespierre had taken over Disney’s Typhoon Lagoon.Lequeu’s spicier catalogue isn’t altogether absent from the show’s current iteration. One drawing of female genitalia (The White Savage, 1779–95) hides demurely behind a special screen in the middle of the gallery—an appropriate setting, given its usual home in the Enfer, the section of France’s national library reserved for the licentious and the pornographic. Another compelling drawing, He Is Free (1788–99), features a nude woman popping partway out of a classical arch. Lying on her back, in the throes of some strange passion, she reaches for a tropical bird whose dangling tail feathers are unmistakably testicular. These are complemented by several of Lequeu’s physiognomic studies—self-portraits of the architect yawning, winking, and generally mugging—presumably intended as scientific examinations of different affective modes but coming closer, in effect, to surreal caricatures.This dualism—supreme rationalism and dreamy deviance—began to attract the attention of architects and historians in the twentieth century. In the 1930s, Viennese architectural historian Emil Kaufmann first unearthed Lequeu from his archival interment and placed him alongside Claude-Nicolas Ledoux as one of the Enlightenment-era architects who prefigured the advent of modernism. Three decades later, Lequeu was in vogue again, viewed as a tripped-out visionary and Sade-ian provocateur; in the 1980s, he was reinvented once more, this time by French academic Philippe Duboy, who spun a hallucinatory history in which the architect possibly never existed, but was instead invented by Marcel Duchamp and a group of artistic coconspirators. Farfetched as that may sound, it only goes to show how easily the long-dead designer lends himself to different ideological agendas and “taste moments,” to use Vidler’s phrase. Never at home in his own time, Lequeu has come to rest in ours, and will doubtless find the future still more congenial. This article appears under the title  “Jean-Jacques Lequeu” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 81–82.
ArtNews℗Vaginal Davis’s Video <em>The White to Be Angry</em> Is a Ham-Fisted Caricature of Right-Wing Extremism℗Jeremy Lybarger℗ArtinAmerica℗23/03/2020℗℗Gary Indiana’s 1985 dismissal of video art as tending to be “as beautiful as Xerox” kept coming to mind as I watched Vaginal Davis’s 1999 video The White to Be Angry, which was recently on view at the Art Institute of Chicago. Davis’s video feels like the xeroxed queer zines of the early ’90s: alternately caustic and irreverent, disorderly, beautiful in spirit if not in style. For those familiar with Davis’s performances in the queer and punk clubs of LA in the late 1970s and ’80s, her presence in a major American art museum may be surprising. She has made a career of skewering institutions of all kinds, and calls herself a “societal threat.” But Davis’s growing recognition today makes sense. In a political moment riven by dogmatism, her work subverting categories of race and gender is freshly urgent. The flamboyant artist (who, one imagines, might be given to embellishment) has said that she was born intersex to a forty-five-year-old Creole-Choctaw mother and a twenty-one-year-old Mexican-American Jewish father who had a one-night stand under a table at a Ray Charles concert at the Hollywood Palladium. She named herself after Angela Davis. Since the 1970s, identity has been at the core of her videos, zines, performances, and visual art. She offers pointed, often parodic takedowns of conservatism and white supremacy.For all its charisma, The White to Be Angry is a ham-fisted vehicle for Davis’s talents. In 1998, her speed metal band Pedro, Muriel, and Esther (PME) released an album, also titled The White to Be Angry, and the nineteen-minute video feels more like a companion piece than like a cohesive statement of its own. Indeed, the curators described the video as a “visual album,” perhaps because PME songs play over each section. At the end of one scene, Davis even spray-paints “PME” on a bedsheet, underscoring the video’s connection to her band. The video is a collage of original vignettes and appropriated broadcast footage, with a frame narrative concerning a young skinhead in LA troubled by his secret queer desires. In the opening scene, his mother chows Doritos while spewing racist diatribes. Confederate flags and swastikas crowd the walls around them. We see a newspaper on a table featuring Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh’s face. In subsequent scenes, Davis’s skinhead assaults a gay man (portrayed as a campy coquette) whom he passes on the street and invites back home. At the end, he picks up a fellow skinhead at a leather bar and the two watch TV, tense with barely controlled homoeroticism.Between the sequences of this narrative, Davis creates the effect of channel-surfing. There are snippets of televangelist programs, soap operas, “America’s Most Wanted,” and the sitcom “Moesha,” among other shows. There are also three longer interludes presented as the films of notable directors. The first, titled Riche Jewish Husband, is a spoof on Woody Allen that includes a part in which actors dance to a punk rendition of “Hava Nagila.” The second, Homosexual Is Criminal, is attributed to the gay horror writer Clive Barker and follows a pair of thrill killers as they torture and murder their way across LA. The third, Beggars of Life, is a more carefree valentine to Davis’s friends, and is credited to the gay filmmaker Bruce LaBruce. These sections are occasionally amusing but don’t add up to much.From the outset, Davis’s caricature of right-wing extremism undermines the video’s potential to take genuine risks. When overripe satire is the default mode, critique becomes entertainment, and reinforces the status quo Davis ostensibly rejects. In The White to Be Angry, the disconnected films-within-the-film and detritus of ’90s mass media produce a dissonant mood that matches the soundtrack. Davis’s lampooning of hypocritical bigots feels tacked-on, however, and has all the subtlety of a Nazi salute. The themes of The White to Be Angry are always relevant, but their execution here is muddled. Davis’s video is as beautiful as a xerox, but not nearly as clear. This article appears under the title  “Vaginal Davis” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 85–86.
ArtNews℗Much of Early Black Cinema Is Lost, but Garrett Bradley's Lyrical Films Restore Its Potential℗Ana Tuazon℗ArtinAmerica℗20/03/2020℗℗New Orleans–based filmmaker Garrett Bradley has been screening her work at film festivals for several years but has recently found an audience in the art world, appearing in group shows at the Whitney Museum of American Art and the New Orleans Museum of Art. “American Rhapsody,” at the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, was Bradley’s first solo exhibition, presenting three of her films: America (2019), AKA (2019), and Alone (2017). America had previously screened at Sundance and other venues as a single-channel cut. But in the exhibition it was an engaging four-channel installation, projected on sheer white flags suspended from the ceiling in an X formation. America begins with still images and clips Bradley took from Lime Kiln Club Field Day (1913), the oldest known surviving film with an all-black cast, starring Bahamian-American recording artist Bert Williams. The clips depict Williams’s character enjoying a day at a fair with the female lead, played by Odessa Warren Grey; their carousel ride plays on each screen. The installation’s design cleverly expands the space of the film. Thanks to the screens’ transparency, traces of the projections can even be seen on the gallery’s walls. The effect vivifies these images of black leisure and joy as they fill the room. Throughout America, Bradley intersperses shots from Lime Kiln Club Field Day with her own black-and-white footage. She shows nonactors engaged in everyday activities—welders at work, orchestra musicians performing, current-day Buffalo Soldiers caring for their horses—and commemorates significant events in black history that occurred in the early twentieth century, such as Bessie Coleman’s becoming, in 1921, the first African American to receive an international pilot’s license. The vignette dedicated to Coleman is short and dreamlike. An image of a young woman in aviator gear appears alongside a shot of swiftly moving clouds. Suddenly, she’s moving through the clouds as if flying. For the most part, America avoids full-on reenactment, so the historical scenes’ references might be lost on viewers. But while Bradley’s scenes have a lyrical quality, they’re an attempt to make up for the loss of unpreserved silent films made in the 1910s and ’20s, which, in an interview with Film Comment, Bradley says might have been “the heyday of Black cinema.” America does not attempt to revise history, instead signaling the impossibility of restoring lost cultural memory that has been supplanted by negative fictions. The two other films in “American Rhapsody” likewise blended experimental and documentary modes of filmmaking; they were shown in rooms open to the main gallery, and thus America’s audio bled into theirs. Shot in gorgeous color, the 8-minute AKA features pairs of mothers and daughters from mixed-race families. It has a hazy, fantastical quality and stands somewhat apart from the conversation about race and disenfranchisement that forms between America and Alone. The latter is a nonfiction short, shot in black-and-white, in which Bradley follows her friend Aloné Watts as she contends with a difficult decision. Aloné’s boyfriend, Desmond, is incarcerated and has just proposed marriage to her. Bradley takes considerable artistic license in shaping the narrative, but avoids overexposing her subject, instead positioning Aloné as one protagonist in a struggle that is common in the United States. A woman named Fox Rich tells Aloné that the carceral system “is designed like slavery to tear you apart,” which resonates with America’s message that the theft of black life and happiness is linked to the absence of black representation in the history of cinema. In Lime Kiln Club Field Day, Bert Williams wears blackface, a convention of minstrelsy that even some black performers followed. The otherwise progressive film exists within a tradition of blackness being performed as a spectacle for a white audience. “American Rhapsody” summoned this past and its connection to today’s media landscape, where stories from black history are produced for a white gaze and black cultural production is appropriated for white profit. Bradley’s films vitally overturn such representational inequities, imagining a lyrical narration of history that tells the real experiences of the people she knows and works with.  This article appears under the title  “Garrett Bradley” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 84–85.
ArtNews℗Seduce and Destroy: Hannah Levy's Dangerous-Looking Sculptures℗Rob Goyanes℗ArtinAmerica℗19/03/2020℗℗Combining fleshy silicone and spindly nickel-plated steel rods in strangely alluring ways, the sculptures in Hannah Levy’s show, “Pendulous Picnic,” suggested the elegant fantasies of a paraphiliac. Three dangerous-looking chandelierlike works hung in the main space. The first was shaped like a squid, with silicone gobs resembling rotting gourds impaled on its curling spike tentacles. The second work’s middle section was a gown of thin silicone stretched taut by dainty claws. The third looked like an upended parasol but with a nippled flotation device for a canopy. As I viewed these sculptures, I kept wanting to crawl under them and have someone cut the lusciously thick chains suspending them from the ceiling, so that I could be crushed. Indeed, the exhibition raised some thorny questions: How does art make danger seem erotic? When is it OK for us to be attracted to the things that hurt or destroy us? In much of Levy’s work, design objects become partially animal or vegetable. In her 2018 show in Dublin, “Panic Hardware,” demonic, sexy chairs pitched too steeply to be sat on seemed to tiptoe toward you on clawed feet. Her Bone-in (2019) was a giant chromed femur sculpture dominating Jeffrey Stark’s small gallery in Manhattan’s Chinatown. The works in “Pendulous Picnic” were at once very Bourgeois and very bourgeois, recalling the surreal forms of the French-American artist as well as impeccable, slightly intimidating pieces of upscale decor. A side room featured sconces in which large, limp silicone casts of asparagus lay atop bent spikes. At the center of the space was a trampoline that masochistically denied would-be bouncers its potential joys. Its rim was encircled with spiky curlicues, and its scaffolding pushed up the silicone mat at the center, creating a kind of baby bump.Levy’s work offers a romance between flesh and machine that is deeply appealing, even if the sterile/organic binaries of her materials can be a little on the nose. Contemporary design focuses increasingly on rendering objects and environments not only functional and pleasurable—in the manner of modern design—but intelligent, capable of surveilling and sucking the capital out of us. Levy’s works reflect a possible direction for our evolving relationship with design. Though her sculptures appear threatening, they are also an ode to the sensual, to the turn-ons of beautiful objects, to the erogenous design possibilities that might lie ahead if commodities could be smart and sensate enough to fetishize us back.   This article appears under the title  “Hannah Levy” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 81–82.
ArtNews℗Katherine Hubbard's Minimal Photographs Render Familiar Subjects Otherworldly℗Tausif Noor℗ArtinAmerica℗18/03/2020℗℗In her photographic work, Katherine Hubbard tends toward inscrutability, decontextualizing objects and rendering familiar landscapes otherworldly. Hubbard, whose practice also includes performance and writing, makes carefully considered references to Minimalism in her photography, with particular attention to Minimalist sculpture’s ambition to reorient the viewer’s relationship to the works’ physical settings. Her exhibition at Company, “Avoid glancing blows” (all works 2019), featured small-scale gelatin silver prints—most of them hanging on the wall in blond wood frames, and four placed in hinged frames on the floor.Smithson Adjacent “XO”—comprising two aerial photographs of rock arrangements near Robert Smithson’s earthwork Spiral Jetty in Utah, one crisscrossed and the other circular—was the show’s most direct reference to the legacy of Minimalism, but a group of high-contrast photographs depicting a raw, wood-beamed underground space carved from bedrock most effectively demonstrated Hubbard’s destabilization of setting. Blue stone bed rock and rubblization were tightly framed, fragmented views of the starkly lit site, while untitled (tread) and untitled (claw) offered crepuscular glimpses of the heavy-duty machinery presumably used to create it. Hubbard offers only partial views of the environment, from multiple vantages, denying viewers any sense of a singular or fixed setting and instead inducing a heightened awareness of the contingency of their own perspectives.Hubbard’s interest in displacing viewers’ perspectives was similarly evident in a trio of photographs showing two crowbars arranged in different configurations in her studio: lying one atop the other in still life spoon; balanced back-to-back in still life lean; and standing one before the other in still life shoulder. The photographs’ dark backgrounds and the decisive, balletic positioning of the objects bring these “still lifes” closer to portraiture, the anthropomorphic quality echoed in the titles’ references to body parts and gestures. Depicting pale, nude legs treading water, the photographs set in hinged frames on the floor were likewise studies of position. The images are ethereal and flecked with light, sensuous but desexualized, their subjects unknown and their settings nebulous. The anonymity, however, helped viewers to see the images’ formal relationship to Xingu River ray, a wall-bound photograph of a stingray underwater at the Pittsburgh Zoo. Throughout the show, Hubbard leveled distinctions between different types of subjects, conflating human and animal, living and inert, availing herself of photography’s capacity to make the commonplace strange. This article appears under the title  “Katherine Hubbard” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 79–80.
ArtNews℗“Defiant Muses” Unearthed French Actress Delphine Seyrig’s Under-Known Work as a Feminist Filmmaker℗Michael McCanne℗ArtinAmerica℗17/03/2020℗℗Delphine Seyrig (1932–1990) is an icon of 1960s avant-garde cinema. The Lebanese-born French actress starred in films by Alain Resnais, Marguerite Duras, Luis Buñuel, and Chantal Akerman, among others. The first gallery of the exhibition “Defiant Muses: Delphine Seyrig and the Feminist Video Collectives in France in the 1970s and 1980s” documented this background, displaying a collection of film posters, costumes, and production stills from her career. Projected on the far wall was a clip of Resnais’s archly boring masterpiece Last Year at Marienbad (1961), in which Seyrig played the female lead. The rest of the sprawling exhibition, however, focused on Seyrig’s lesser-known work as a feminist filmmaker. In doing so, it explored a little-known history: that of radical feminists in France in the 1970s and ’80s using the newly invented video camera to make outsider films on a range of subjects, from sexism in the media to national liberation struggles.Swept up in the political unrest of 1968, Seyrig, then in the middle of her acting career, threw herself into feminism. She signed the 1971 Manifesto of the 343, a list of women who had procured an abortion (illegal in France until 1975), and spoke publicly in support of women’s rights. In 1975 she attended filmmaker Carole Roussopoulos’s workshop for women artists on how to make videos with the new Sony Portapak. The two women became friends; and with the translator Ioana Wieder, they formed a filmmaking collective named Les Insoumuses—a portmanteau of the French words for “defiant” and “muses.”Like similar filmmaking collectives in the United States, such as Videofreex and TVTV, Les Insoumuses used video to excoriate the moving image industry and society at large. They produced rough, DIY-style films characteristic of the rudimentary technology they employed. Some works focus on a single person speaking or reading a text, the camera slowly zooming in and out on the subject. Others détourn footage from TV programs, reframing it with handwritten title cards and voice-overs that poke fun at the sexist content. Working in video allowed the women to create powerful moving images without the infrastructure of a television studio or production company, realms long dominated by men. A quote of Seyrig emblazoned on one gallery wall read: “For me, video meant the chance to make cinema without having to ask anyone for anything.”The exhibition featured many of the collective’s films, which were projected onto walls or played on old television sets, along with production stills and ephemera. In one 1976 piece, Seyrig reads a French translation of Valerie Solanas’s SCUM Manifesto into a dictation machine while Roussopoulos transcribes at a typewriter. In another, titled Sois belle et tais-toi (Be Pretty and Shut Up, 1976), Seyrig interviews twenty-four French and American actresses about the difficulty of working in the film industry as women. The collective also documented underreported struggles going on at the time. They made a video about a sex workers’ strike in Lyon, as well as several on demonstrations in support of trade unions, political prisoners, and the emerging gay rights movement.Les Insoumuses made most of their films in the 1970s, but continued to collaborate on and off through the 1980s. In 1982, they took steps to preserve the cultural record of their movement by establishing the Centre Audiovisuel Simone de Beauvoir in Paris, an archive of their work and other feminist audiovisual media. In some ways, “Defiant Muses” was an apotheosis of their efforts to become agents of cultural production, free from social and political constraints. Through this work, Seyrig, who had long been the object of the camera’s powerful gaze, finally became its master.This article appears under the title  “Defiant Muses” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 88–89.
ArtNews℗“Vida Americana” Positions Mexico at the Center of American Modernism℗Dennis Zhou℗ArtinAmerica℗16/03/2020℗℗The Mexican Revolution, a bitterly fought struggle that ended in 1920, left a multiethnic society fractured. As part of its ambitious agenda, the reformist government that consolidated power in the 1920s used public art to unify the country. President Álvaro Obregón’s administration commissioned murals depicting Indigenous Mexicans, farmers, and revolutionary Zapatistas for the sides of the most prominent civic buildings. Leading muralists Diego Rivera, José Clemente Orozco, and David Alfaro Siqueiros, known as “Los Tres Grandes,” combined Renaissance fresco techniques with modernist forms and leftist iconography. They formed a template for postrevolutionary art that included Rivera’s classical style of composition, which borrowed from both cinematic montage and pre-Columbian sculpture; Orozco’s expressionistic mythography; and the dynamic approach to representing three-dimensional space that Siqueiros called “polyangular perspective.”This politically radical avant-garde inspired a generation of young painters based in the United States who made pilgrimages to Mexico, worked as assistants to Mexican artists, and created murals in both countries. The standard narrative of American painting has long focused on the notion of European-influenced modernism erupting into postwar Abstract Expressionism. But this potted history obscures the work of diverse artists who pursued figurative modes between the 1920s and ’40s and looked to Mexico City as much as to Paris for models to emulate. This Pan-American inheritance is restored in the Whitney Museum’s monumental exhibition “Vida Americana: Mexican Muralists Remake American Art, 1925–1945.” Featuring a formidable number of paintings, studies, and large-scale reproductions of key works by the Mexican muralists alongside contemporaneous pieces by US-based artists, from Jackson Pollock to Charles White, the show affirms the political potential of visual art. At a moment of tension between the US and Mexican governments, it details rich cross-border cultural exchanges, offering a timely reminder that “American art” encompasses the art of all the Americas.“Vida Americana” conveys the global fascination with postrevolutionary Mexico. Leon Trotsky received temporary refuge in the country, and Sergei Eisenstein, whose unfinished film ¡Que viva México! (begun 1930) is on view at the Whitney, found inspiration there. Photographers from the US, like Edward Weston and Tina Modotti, documented Mexico’s geometric pre-Columbian monuments and newly empowered campesinos. The curatorial team, led by Barbara Haskell, rightfully frames the muralists’ appeal as an explicitly modernist one. As the painter Reuben Kadish is quoted in the catalogue as saying decades later, “Siqueiros coming to LA meant as much then as did the Surrealists coming to New York in the forties.” If the later influx of Europeans like André Breton and Salvador Dalí incited a dive into the subconscious, the Tres Grandes artists, each of whom traveled to the US to complete major projects between 1927 and 1940, prompted a fervent desire to create public-facing works.Siqueiros established a “Bloc of Mural Painters” in LA, and two of its members, Kadish and a young Philip Guston, traveled to Mexico to paint The Struggle Against Terrorism (1934–35) at the University of Michoacán. This dynamic allegory of inquisitorial violence, represented in the exhibition as part of an architectural model, shows an onslaught from menacing, hooded figures—images that would reappear in Guston’s later work. Other US artists joined the Mexican Syndicate for Technical Workers, Painters, and Sculptors, like Pablo O’Higgins, who invited a group of volunteers to Mexico City in 1935 to complete a series of murals at the Abelardo L. Rodríguez Market, under Rivera’s supervision. Among them was Isamu Noguchi, who produced History as Seen from Mexico in 1936, one of the rare sculptural reliefs from the period.In the US, Rivera, Orozco, and Siqueiros found common cause with regionalist artists who aimed to show the lives of working Americans throughout the country. On loan are five canvases from Thomas Hart Benton’s revisionist American Historical Epic (1924–27), depicting European settlement of the US as a story of violence and dispossession. In 1930–31, the New School in New York commissioned both Benton and Orozco to paint murals for its expansion. Benton’s America Today (1930–31), a panoramic sequence illustrating progress in industry and agriculture, complemented Orozco’s Call for Revolution and Universal Brotherhood (1930–31), a five-panel fresco incorporating likenesses of Gandhi and Lenin into a globe-spanning narrative of decolonization and working-class revolution. Galvanized by the muralists’ emphasis on racial solidarity during the Jim Crow era, African American artists including White and Jacob Lawrence adopted their Mexican counterparts’ narrative techniques, bold colors, and gestural clarity to foreground the experiences of black people in the US.Progressive American artists found support in the New Deal–era Federal Art Project, which commissioned hundreds of artists to adorn public buildings throughout the US during the Depression. The Whitney exhibition features several fascinating studies from this period. Ben Shahn, an immigrant from Lithuania who had worked as Rivera’s assistant, produced a three-panel mural for the Jersey Homesteads housing project depicting the immigrant experience through representations of his mother alongside Sacco and Vanzetti, Einstein, and garment workers on New York’s Lower East Side.The picket lines, protests, and scenes of racial injustice prominent in FAP works formed a repertory that would be evoked in postwar folk and protest songs. The muralists’ most lasting influence, however, might have been in the development of Abstract Expressionism. Jackson Pollock is the key figure here, and the Whitney includes several telling examples of his evolution. A student of both Benton and Siqueiros, Pollock was likely encouraged to develop his signature drip technique by observing Siqueiros’s wide-ranging experiments with blowtorches, airbrushes, and other industrial tools. Pollock’s Untitled (Naked Man with Knife), 1938–40, one of a dozen works by the artist on view, strains toward abstraction, its swirling mass of color foreshadowing his later breakthroughs.Despite the exhibition’s strengths, “Vida Americana” never quite explains why so many of the artists from this period would later turn inward, transmuting political passion into private expression. Leftist disillusionment with the USSR peaked during the Moscow show trials, and, for many, the previously popular art of social realism took on a propagandistic pall by the 1940s. The nature of arts patronage in the United States also played a role. Rivera, who in Mexico relished in portraying grotesque oligarchs, became dependent on the very patrons he had caricatured, his work shading into a sort of techno-utopianism in murals for the auto industry–backed Detroit Institute of Arts and the Rockefeller Center. Bothered by allegations that he had grown too cozy with industrialists, Rivera included a figure of Lenin in the latter mural, a dazzling allegory of social and scientific progress. Man at the Crossroads (1933) was promptly painted over, and Rivera returned to Mexico to re-create a smaller-scale (but still massive) version at the Palacio de Bellas Artes, a reproduction of which is on view in the last gallery of the show.The curators have approached the unique challenge of muralism’s site-specificity in a variety of ways, including by exhibiting several such reproductions. Replicating the original position of Orozco’s Prometheus (1930) in the dining hall of Pomona College in Claremont, California, the titular figure appears to strain against an arched niche approximated in the Whitney gallery at smaller scale. Still, “Vida Americana” might ultimately leave viewers with a sense of how uneasily these works sit in a museum. Some look as stunned by their descent as the first religious frescoes transported from the church to the gallery did. Their presence as aesthetic objects to be admired in a museum acknowledges a desacralization—or at least a kind of depoliticization.“Vida Americana” is a laudable effort to preserve a history of public art that has sadly proved less than permanent, but one hopes that it will inspire pilgrimages to the sources: the Abelardo L. Rodríguez Market, for example, whose extant murals can be contemplated amid the sounds of vendors hawking produce. That would be the greatest testament to the fact that a popular art that doesn’t condescend to its viewers, and an experimental art that doesn’t abandon them, can still be worthy of devotion. This article appears under the title  “'Vida Americana'” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 75–77.
ArtNews℗Fiona Tan's Latest Show Explored Relationships between the Analog and Digital Worlds℗Emily Watlington℗ArtinAmerica℗13/03/2020℗℗Indonesia-born, Amsterdam-based artist Fiona Tan began her career in the 1990s, when digital technologies began transforming—or bastardizing, depending on whom you ask—the mediums she took up: film, video, and photography. At first glance, I thought her exhibition at Peter Freeman, “Archive/Ruins,” was a strictly analog affair that reveled in nostalgia for a bygone world. Projected on a wall in the main space, the grainy, six-minute black-and-white video Archive (2019) depicted the interior of a vast, abandoned building filled with towering rows of card catalogues. The projection’s rounded rectangular shape, evoking frames on celluloid, suggested that the work was a digitized film—the print too fragile and technically cumbersome to be shown on a loop in a gallery. Six gorgeous photogravures of stills from the video hung nearby, reinforcing the old-fashioned feel. It turned out, however, that Archive originated not on film but on the computer. The video is a CGI reimagining of a historical institution in Belgium, the Mundaneum. Founded in 1910 as the Palais Mondial (World Palace) and renamed in 1924, the Mundaneum was the brainchild of lawyers Paul Otlet and Henri La Fontaine—the former considered the father of information science, and the latter a Nobel Peace Prize laureate for his work heading the International Peace Bureau—and was devoted to cataloguing all published human knowledge as a step on the path to world peace. Archive is neither a post-internet project nor a product of archive fever, but a refreshing look at continuities and disjunctions between media old and new. For instance, in 2012, the Mundaneum, which has been a museum since 1998, embarked on a partnership with Google, whose search engine can be considered a digital descendant of Otlet and La Fontaine’s paper project but whose work hardly aligns with world peace efforts.On headphones in the same gallery played the sixteen-minute sound piece Hydriotaphia (2016), in which a man with an Irish accent reads an excerpt from a 1658 book of the same title by Thomas Browne, stating that “time, which antiquates antiquities, . . . hath an art to make dust of all things” but that “the long habit of living indisposeth us for dying.” In the next room, the two channels of a work called Ruins (2020) were projected on opposing walls: one channel is 16 mm film; the other, high-definition digital video. It was difficult to see both at the same time, which worked to mask the stark differences between them and thwarted simplistic comparisons (though the film was more attractive). Ruins portrays a disused mining complex in Belgium, now a monument to a lost civilization and way of life and here a stand-in not only for mortality but also for the slowly decaying art of film. Tan’s depiction reads as tranquil and reverent, though: not a tragic lamentation, but a gesture of acceptance. There is comfort and even relief, she suggests, in being but a speck of something larger. “In vain do individuals hope for immortality,” says Browne, “or any patent from oblivion.”This article appears under the title  “Ken Ehrlich” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 80–81.
ArtNews℗Ken Ehrlich’s “Dysfunctional” Furniture Disrupts the Experience of Domestic Space℗Liz Hirsch℗ArtinAmerica℗12/03/2020℗℗Titled “Dysfunctional Furniture”—a phrase that could qualify as an irreverent definition of sculpture—Ken Ehrlich’s exhibition at Human Resources welcomed a categorical fuzziness around form and utility, bringing together a series of sculptural furnishings designed with neither the pedestal nor the human user fully in mind. These objects function as furniture, but, as the “dys-” implies, badly. They aren’t very useful, nor are they ergonomic or performance-tested. Some are a bit fragile or liable to give you a sharp jab. They imply a set of enigmatic expectations that disregard casual use.Perhaps to test this dysfunction, Ehrlich reversed the familiar trajectory of an artwork made, displayed, sold, and then situated at the behest of its owner. Ahead of the exhibition, he temporarily installed a number of the pieces in the homes of writers in his Los Angeles community. This entailed ongoing conversations with each participant and an organic match-making process to determine which piece they would temporarily live with. Some of the writers composed short reflections on the experience, published in an illustrated pamphlet accompanying the show. Assembled in an almost circular configuration, suggesting both conversation and the allure of a showroom, the works were characterized by simple, slightly irregular geometries, the juxtaposition of disparate textures, and flashes of solid red, green, blue, or yellow. In nearly all of them, hard, smooth, and finished surfaces are combined with salvaged timber. In Untitled (table/footrest), 2019, a laminated beam supporting a cantilevered glass tabletop juts out of a notch in a raw wood beam placed on the floor, while in Untitled (side table), 2019, a rectangular pane of glass vertically bisects a hunk of eucalyptus wood. The room was full of alternating sharp and curving edges: the pointy laminated triangle in Untitled (Variability table), 2019, for instance, is joined to a parallel laminate disk by a coil of black metal tubing. Turned on its side, it is a table that could seat no one. The scale and postures of the works make them appear almost creaturely. Various writers in the pamphlet remark that they seem to be in the company of something quasi-sentient, with which they have a sometimes antagonistic relationship. Andrew Culp and Eva Della Lana, who lived with Untitled (shelf), 2019, liken it to both a guest and a ghost, writing: “What we did not anticipate was how it would startle us.” On the walls, photographic diptychs portrayed the pieces both with and without their human hosts, souvenirs of their time together. These images add warmth and intimacy when reproduced alongside the text contributions in the pamphlet, but as framed photographs in the exhibition, they were one layer of meta-commentary too many.The furnished interior is inevitably an expression of social class, a dimension Ehrlich explores through social reproduction theory. He shared several texts with his writer-collaborators that he identified as sources of inspiration for the project: essays on the relationship of design to everyday life by Italian designers Gae Aulenti and Enzo Mari, and a canonical Marxist-feminist text by Mariarosa Dalla Costa and Selma James, “The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community” (1972). Because Dalla Costa and James associated the domestic interior with the role of housewife—someone who delivers the conditions that make all other social life possible, typically without recognition—they viewed the traditional family home as a site of oppression. In turn, they argued for a refusal of domesticity equivalent to a strike. Ehrlich’s dysfunctional furnishings take up this idea of a disruptive potential within the material experience of home, attempting to revive these politics for a different place and time. This article appears under the title  “Ken Ehrlich” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 86–87.
ArtNews℗Sarah Rothberg and Marina Zurkow's Aquacentric Worldview Gets Tangled in Tech℗Rob Arcand℗ArtinAmerica℗11/03/2020℗℗Sarah Rothberg and Marina Zurkow have used virtual reality, generative video, and other multimedia formats to explore the logistic dimensions of the communications infrastructure and its impact on the natural world. Zurkow’s past projects—Dear Climate (2014–), Flight (2016), and Climoji (2017)—explore, respectively, the potential of instructive posters, digital animation, and custom emojis to make the effects of climate change legible to human perception. Rothberg’s augmented reality lab for Apple (part of the company’s [AR]T initiative organized in partnership with the New Museum last year) introduces users to new tools for probing the relationship between digital and physical environments. Yet “Wet Logic,” the artists’ collaborative exhibition at New York’s bitforms gallery, struggles to channel their experimental approaches into a cohesive message. Zurkow and Rothberg play with the technological possibilities of their respective mediums instead of offering pointed critiques.As its title suggests, the show presents water as a central metaphor for ordering our understanding of the world. Geology’s demonstration of the accretion of layers over linear time makes everything seem impervious to change. In search of an alternative, the artists have looked to writers like Philip Steinberg and Kimberly Peters, whose 2015 essay “Wet Ontologies, Fluid Spaces” advocates reorienting the field of geography away from plane geometry’s flatness toward depth, volume, and cyclicality. Zurkow and Rothberg show how the properties of digital media help communicate these insights.The generative videos in Zurkow’s “Oceans Like Us” series (all works 2020) explore the temporal implications of an ocean-centric perspective. Each work has a backdrop of animated coral, kelp, and grouper. Pollutants drift slowly by in sequences that play in randomized patterns on twenty-seven-minute loops. Zurkow’s custom software ensures that the video is never the same twice. These works can’t be viewed in their entirety. Their expansive temporality evokes the scale of geological time. Schools of minnows swim past plastic bottles as viewers recognize that concerns about climate crisis are only a small blip on a timeline much larger and more complex than human consciousness can adequately conceptualize.Impending ecological collapse is a weighty topic, but the slow balances it with the lightness of Zurkow’s schematic, cartoonlike drawings, which appear both in her animations and in the gray-green mural that covers the gallery’s walls. There are touches of humor, too. Toilet Joke I, a sculpture made by Zurkow and Rothberg in collaboration, fills the ceramic bowl of the work’s namesake with recycled aquarium gravel as an iPhone positioned amid the rocks plays a looped video of lapping ocean waves. Study for Toilet Joke II is a polished fishbowl containing a whirling vortex of foggy water, placed on a plinth. As welcome as the whimsy may be, these pieces seem to be there to fill out a gallery show rather than to support a message.Rothberg’s virtual reality piece Water Without Wet asks users to pantomime various gestures involving water while wearing an Oculus Rift headset. Gripping a pair of controllers, users are prompted to wash their hands, sip from a cup, water a plant, and participate in numerous other activities that demonstrate water’s omnipresence in everyday life. A distant voice repeats soothing mantras: “There's no such thing as stillness.” “Can you say what is a cycle and what is not?” It’s another approach to manipulating viewer’s sense of duration. But porting lived experience to virtual reality reduces these habitual gestures to a gamified version of them.Here, as elsewhere in the show, the artists struggle to move beyond the affordances of their chosen mediums. Though water is a central theme, the approach to it is muddied by the fact that each work says more about its own format than anything else. The gesture beyond a medium’s limits is what makes a lasting impact. But Rothberg and Zurkow trade engagement with ideas for fascination with technology. Whatever stands to be said about the alternatives to geocentric perspectives is lost in the ambiguity of their approach.
ArtNews℗León Ferrari’s Iconoclastic Work Proved That Only a Theist Can Be a Sinner℗Ara H. Merjian℗ArtinAmerica℗11/03/2020℗℗Generally considered a conceptual artist, León Ferrari (1920–2013) might just as aptly be described as an activist. His collages and assemblages eschew allusive subtlety for unambiguously anticlerical and anti-imperialist imagery and brazen juxtapositions. For his notorious 1965 piece La Civilización Occidental y Cristiana (Western and Christian Civilization)—presented here in a 2010 miniature version—Ferrari appended a figure of the crucified Christ to a 6½-foot plastic model of an American fighter jet, which he hung nose-down, as if the plane were in free fall. The foreign policy of the United States was a consistent target of the Buenos Aires–born artist’s political and aesthetic ire throughout the 1960s and ’70s, as was the abidingly Catholic culture of his native country and its complicity with an increasingly repressive military regime. This exhibition provided a substantial survey of his work.Originally trained as an engineer, Ferrari began his artistic career working with ceramics in Italy. Having settled back in Buenos Aires by 1955, he pursued sculpture in a variety of materials before experimenting with the ink drawings and collages that would define his oeuvre and its ever more ideological preoccupations. Ferrari’s work is not often nuanced. For a series he began in 1985, Ferrari had caged pigeons shit on reproductions of Michelangelo’s Last Judgment fresco from the Sistine Chapel. In the collage Final Judgment (2005), he covered the apse of a church with an image of Jews wearing Star of David patches during the Holocaust so that a crowd of seated cardinals appears to be gazing raptly at a horrific spectacle–turned–Catholic rite. To be sure, the events to which Ferrari’s work reacted hardly called for understated responses. Between the 1960s and ’80s, Argentina was rocked by coups d’état, currency devaluation, and student and labor unrest. The metaphorical transgressions in his work paled in comparison to Argentina’s actual political violence. With his safety increasingly at risk, Ferrari fled to São Paulo in 1976, returning to Buenos Aires only in 1991. Some of his later efforts lack the proverbial teeth of his early work. His 2004 model fighter jet adorned with feathers and his 2002 blender filled with Virgin Mary figurines, for instance, reprise the impudence of La Civilización Occidental y Cristiana to repetitive and even gimmicky effect. Ferrari’s critiques of Christianity (and of Catholicism more particularly) are not mere caprice, however. They form part of a larger assault on deeply ingrained origin stories and founding narratives that have served both nationalist hegemony and political repression. The irreverence of a collage like Angels (1986)—in which images of ceramic putti hover beside a camouflaged tank—draws on the legacy of Dada. In turn, Ferrari’s assemblages echo (however obliquely) in a range of contemporary practices. The works in Rachel Harrison’s recent retrospective at the Whitney Museum in New York, for instance, brought to mind many of Ferrari’s pieces and their wry humor. Perhaps more important, his provocations take on new inflections in the current political atmosphere, in which polemics, self-righteousness, and tribal allegiances reign supreme. Ferrari is widely known as an “iconoclastic” artist. Yet he obsessively invokes Christian icons in his work, calling to mind the old adage that only a theist can be a sinner. His work shows that to transgress the propriety of Christian iconography, one must possess a degree of aesthetic respect for that canon, even while channeling its images into new, less repressive meanings. This article appears under the title  “León Ferrari” in the April 2020 issue, p. 89.
ArtNews℗Noah Davis's Paintings Envisioned an Eerie, Ethereal Decolonized World℗Terence Trouillot℗ArtinAmerica℗10/03/2020℗℗In 2013, painter Noah Davis founded the Underground Museum (UM) in Arlington Heights, Los Angeles, with his brother, Khalil Joseph, and his wife, Karon Davis. The three aimed to bring museum-quality shows to a historically underserved African American and Latinx neighborhood. Two years later, in August 2015, Davis died of a rare form of cancer at the age of thirty-two. Expertly organized by Helen Molesworth—former chief curator at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, and a friend of the artist—the recent exhibition at David Zwirner showcased a large selection of the enigmatic paintings Davis made between 2007 and 2015. A side gallery was furnished to pay homage to UM by evoking its back office: there were couches designed by the artist’s mother, works by Karon Davis, maquettes of the institution’s past exhibitions, and a presentation of BLKNWS (2018–19), a two-channel video work by Joseph that takes the form of a fictional news broadcast chronicling black excellence.Davis’s paintings are weird, dark, and intoxicatingly beautiful—a range he hit with subtlety and ease. He used muted colors, diluted pigments, and washed-out drip marks to render black figures in surreal environments. Some works are soothing, such as Pueblo del Rio: Concerto (2014), a nocturnal scene of a figure playing a grand piano in the street outside a South Los Angeles housing project. Others seem like grim vignettes from psychological or science-fiction horror movies. Man with Alien and Shotgun (2008) depicts a man, shotgun in hand, holding a long gray fishlike creature, ostensibly dead after the hunt. The Last Barbeque (2008)—perhaps a reference to Margo Humphrey’s lithograph The Last Bar-B-Que (1989), which reinterprets the Last Supper as a gathering of people dressed in colorful African prints—appears to be a family portrait of sorts. Three figures stand together near a grill in the painting’s bottom right-hand corner. From a bush nearby, another trio of people, dressed formally, emerges ominously, as if they are ancestral spirits. A figure in the background is thrown backward as a plume of smoke rises before him: a chilling spectacle of a young man’s demise. Still other paintings are domestic and humdrum, save a few strange and dreamlike details. In an untitled work from 2015, two women rest on a beige couch. Nearby, another figure sits on a white sofa, torso cropped, lap obscured by an ambiguous dripping white form.Davis was influenced by the films of Alfred Hitchcock and Roger Corman, as well as the writings of cult novelist Richard Brautigan, most notably the novel In Watermelon Sugar (1968), which tells the story of a building called iDEATH that houses a community after the fall of civilization. Davis dedicated his 2010 series “Forgotten Works” to Brautigan’s novel. One painting from it, The Summer House, was featured in the Zwirner show. It depicts a cottage in the distance, while in the foreground a figure gazes up at a silvery, abstract sculpture. In a 2013 interview with A.i.A., Davis called the world of his paintings his “own black countercultural dystopia”—a postapocalyptic landscape populated solely by black people. This future without whiteness is eerie and ethereal, but it also celebrates blackness in its totality.Davis’s paintings are prescient and, in almost wizardly fashion, appear new, as if the pigments are fresh on the canvas. It’s hard to say if this was an effect of Molesworth’s arrangement of the works by palette rather than chronology, or if it’s simply a testament to the enduring nature of Davis’s art. In any case, the paintings transcend the elegiac tone and public praise that always accompany a posthumous show like this one. They offer something new and exciting at every turn.This article appears under the title  “Noah Davis” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 78–79.
ArtNews℗Is Peter Saul's Gross-Out Painting Political?℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗09/03/2020℗℗At some point in the depths of my early teens, I was permanently scarred by Mad Magazine. The comic that did the job, a charming little number by Tom Bunk called The Zit, begins with a teenager popping his pimple in the bathroom. As pus shoots onto the mirror, he grins orgasmically. But then, more and more stuff starts to flow out of the little hole in his face—blood, guts, an eyeball, a lung. By the final panel, his innards have flooded the whole room, leaving behind an empty sac of skin. If this is making your stomach churn, you might as well stop reading—the paintings of Peter Saul are not for the faint of heart.It’s nice knowing that you’re not alone in your traumas, so when I visited the Peter Saul retrospective at the New Museum, I was glad to learn that Mad had left its gunky residue in his thoughts too. He became a devoted reader of the magazine sometime in the late 1950s, when he was a young painter living in Paris. By the middle of the next decade, he’d embarked on a long career that would return again and again to Mad’s house style, all slimy surfaces and rubbery bodies, squished and stretched and squeezed inside out. Though his early work didn’t bring him great success, he was able to keep up a quietly fruitful career, thanks largely to Allan Frumkin, his loyal dealer of thirty years. By the turn of the century, he’d acquired a reputation as a painter’s painter—basically a consolation prize for never catching a big break. All this has changed very recently, and, frankly, just in time for him to enjoy the results: he turns eighty-six this year.I find Saul’s paintings impressive but—odd as it is to say about such robust blood-and-guts work—thin. He’s an utterly feverish colorist, heir to Bacon and Delacroix, and you can’t help but admire his tense, syncopated compositions. But his style is so given to extremes that, almost by definition, it’s hard to develop or sustain; he always has to be “on.” Every eyeball must bulge Wile E. Coyote–ishly out of its owner’s cranium; every phallus must shoot through a gaping orifice; every naked organ must glow ruby red. In time, Saul’s provocation starts to feel a little one-note—as predictable, in its own way, as the nineteenth-century academic art he is prone to praise in interviews. As satire, his work leaves me cold: instead of exposing flaws and secrets of its subjects, it ends up referring to nothing beyond itself.One of the earliest mature works in the exhibition, Sex Deviate Being Executed (1964), is also one of Saul’s best. Completed around the same time that Andy Warhol was obsessing over similar material, it shows a gay man smoking a cigarette as he sits in an electric chair. Simple moralistic interpretations get lost in the scene’s queasy virtuosity: the man’s stark profile; his thick, almost monumental arm, which resembles the haunch of an Egyptian sphinx; the decaying blue of his skin against the chair’s lilac. Here and throughout the galleries, the wall texts insist on simple moralistic interpretations anyway—apparently, this painting is about how homophobia, nationalism, and capital punishment are bad, and how a victim “maintains his dignity” in the face of death. The choice of words is unintentionally hilarious, since they appear just a few paces away from a decidedly undignified painting by the name of Human Dignity (1966), in which the title is scrawled on a pair of heaving, planetary breasts. Trust the show’s didactics and you could see Saul as a rough-around-the-edges liberal crusader—but you’d have to ignore the actual works.Saul would continue to experiment with elements of Sex Deviate for years to come, seeing how far he could stretch the colors, the shapes, and the hysterical tones before they broke apart. To find the right balance, he first had to go all-out. Wild, chaotic scenes need to be carefully choreographed in order to get their point across, and in some of Saul’s 1960s antiwar paintings, plain old clutter tries vainly for chaotic splendor. Vietnam (1966) does everything short of canceling itself out. Its most striking bits, like the fetus silhouette or the GI’s thick, Sex Deviate–esque arm, get lost in a rainbow muddle. The countless superlative ideas blunt each other’s impact, with the result that the painting as a whole doesn’t pack half the punch of more pared-down protest art by Barnett Newman or Leon Golub.Saul seems to have understood this, because his work from the ’70s onward is less jumbled and more conspicuously planned. He learned to wring more out of less material. The long, gray diagonals of Subway I (1979) keep our eyes focused on the blood, mangled limbs, and sardonic splashes of lime, even as they emphasize the mathematical cool of the composition. Solid, neutral colors take on still greater importance in Saul’s late work, which dominates the second floor of the exhibition. Here, the subjects seem to float in blobs of amber or pink or moldy green, the better for us to study their ridiculousness. And there is plenty: Bush the Younger with a pulverized Abu Ghraib prisoner, Custer & Co. butchering Native Americans, a Trump-haired alligator.At once exuberant and precise, these paintings grew from decades of bold experimenting and canny problem-solving. But they’re still oddly interchangeable: Saul gives everything the same mucous texture and melted-cheese shape, whether it’s Reagan’s hair or Trump’s smirk, so that the comedy stems from the eccentricity of style rather than anything particular to Reagan or Trump. (The Bush portrait, a notable exception, is the best thing on the floor—you can almost hear the long, Texan “u” oozing from Dubya’s mouth.) Some sort of antiestablishment point is nevertheless gestured at, which partially explains Saul’s ascendance today, as the gatekeepers of the art world scrounge for makers of Radical Art in the Age of Trump.Suddenly, Saul’s caricature is taken for a kind of realism and his over-the-top energy interpreted as political conviction. “The world, as I see it, is beginning to seem more and more like a Peter Saul painting,” critic Jeremy Sigler noted in 2017, and almost all coverage of the new show has said something to this effect. In the New York Times, Holland Cotter applauded Saul for using “offensiveness as a form of resistance—political, personal.” But resistance to what, exactly? It’s fun to see a painter desecrating kings and sacred cows but surprisingly hard to point to anything truly, viscerally shocking in Saul’s recent political art. Gross-out humor is gross but also rather innocent—most Mad fans were kids, after all.Where I see innocence, Roberta Smith sees “political incorrectness,” finding that Saul’s work “stands head and shoulders above much of today’s visually challenged political art.” I’ll grant her the second point. As for political incorrectness—isn’t the fact that this artist has gotten such raves in the paper of record a hint as to the work’s true colors? More than once Saul has worried aloud that he doesn’t go far enough in his paintings, and he would know. His late work is full of bright, gleeful naughtiness, the kind that turns stomachs but doesn’t turn away anyone likely to buy a ticket to the New Museum. It’s politically incorrect art for people who pride themselves on being politically correct.This article appears under the title  “Peter Saul” in the April 2020 issue, pp. 83–84.
ArtNews℗An Exhibition Revises MoMA’s 1959 “New Images of Man” with Newer Images of Men—and Women℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗06/03/2020℗℗Dave Muller’s wall-size painting Dust Jacket #1 (NIM Strand), 2020, depicts a worn copy of the catalogue for a 1959 Museum of Modern Art exhibition curated by Peter Selz, “New Images of Man.” Muller faithfully reproduces the book’s flap text and title and the stark photograph of a Giacometti sculpture on its cover, as well as scuffs, stains, tears, and a price tag from the Strand: $3. Selz’s show advanced a brutalized sense of the human figure that was meant to represent a bloody century, but that was male- and Western-centric and that has weathered about as well the catalogue. Muller’s painting hung prominently in curator Alison M. Gingeras’s ambitious update on Selz’s show, which was as much a critique as an homage. In addition to pieces by a handful of artists from the original exhibition, like Karel Appel, Gingeras included works by midcentury female, non-Western, and Eastern European artists that Selz could have featured but didn’t, as well as works by contemporary troublers of the human figure, like Rachel Harrison. The flattened Giacometti in Muller’s painting provided a backdrop for a pair of 1960s statues by Alina Szapocznikow (one resin, one bronze) and Sarah Lucas’s Elf Warrior (2018), a reclining figure bearing a massive erection. Against Selz’s avatar, these works offered a more plastic but no less harsh take on the human subject. Such juxtapositions served to counter the masculine tenor of Selz’s exhibition. Gingeras’s rich revisionism was more explicit in New Images of Man Spread (p. 62–63, Annotated by Alison and Dave), 2020, another huge painting by Muller, this one made directly on the wall and portraying two pages of Selz’s catalogue that describe Jean Dubuffet’s rude images of women. Annotations that Muller and Gingeras made on the depicted text are a combo of careful reading and defacement. Installed atop the painting were works by self-taught artists—sculpted heads by Michel Nedjar and painted portraits by Carol Rama and Eugene Von Bruenchenhein.Other revisionist gestures felt only slightly less dated than their target. Interpretation Willem de Kooning, for example, was an unattributed drawing that reimagined the painter’s toothy, screeching “Women” and lay on the floor under plexiglass. (Presumably no one would lend their real de Kooning to be used as a rug.) But upstairs, the museology of modern art gave way to looser, brighter, generally less tortured interpretations of the human form—for instance, Misleidys Castillo Pedroso’s 2016–18 drawings of Day-Glo musclemen and Ahmed Morsi’s 1986 painting of an empathy-laden, long-faced man and horse—emphasizing the absence, in Selz’s vision of “man,” of fecundityand joy. With a selection of photographs at the gallery entrance by Zofia Rydet and Deana Lawson, Gingeras also invoked another MoMA blockbuster dedicated to the figure, the 1955 photography exhibition “The Family of Man,” curated by Edward Steichen. Both Rydet and Lawson study the composition and context of the family unit, in communist Poland and contemporary America, respectively. Both pin their subjects to the middle of the frame, eschewing Steichen’s fuzzy humanism for a style that captures their specific humanity. In reprising these shows, Gingeras articulates a strong faith that art is somehow responsible for, and responsive to, something essential about being human. This idea is worth repeating, especially when updated with a contemporary sense of intersectionality. But formally speaking, Gingeras’s selection of new new images (no digital art? no video? no performance?) was more conservative than the era it was meant to represent. This article appears under the title “'New Images of Man'” in the April 2020 issue, p. 86.
ArtNews℗Yoshua Okon’s Work Proposes That We Burn It All Down—But Maybe Not <em>All</em> of It℗Gaby Cepeda℗ArtinAmerica℗05/03/2020℗℗Neoliberalism is trending in Mexico right now. When questioned recently about the government’s inadequate response to the increasing rates of feminicidios (murders of women), President López Obrador said that his administration was attacking the root causes, that neoliberalism had not only brought misery to huge swaths of the population but had also sparked the social decay that led to violence. Though the president was perhaps not entirely wrong, the very next night he was tweeting from a quite congenial-seeming dinner he was having with executives from transnational corporations like Walmart, Chevron, MetLife, and Amazon.Neoliberalism was also at the heart of Yoshua Okón’s exhibition “Oraculo” (Oracle), which presented works that the Mexico City–based artist, who began his career in the 1990s, made between 2011 and 2019. In his quest to expose how messed-up our economic-political system is, Okón depicts its effects on people who are merely cogs in the machine. For his video series “Oríllese a la Orilla” (1999–2000), Okón paid Mexico City cops to do embarrassing dances or get beat up, using his privilege as an affluent Mexican to bribe low-wage workers—Mexico City cops make less than five hundred dollars a month—into humiliating situations that were supposed to . . . do what exactly? Show the audience how easily corrupted underpaid Mexican cops are? Show, in other words, that water is wet? In a two-channel video on view in the exhibition, Oracle (2015), Okón is again anything but subtle. The work shows a dozen members of the Arizona Border Defenders, a “volunteer border watch organization,” restaging a protest from 2015, when the group was raging against a busload of unaccompanied children who were expected to be held in the town of Oracle, Arizona. In the video, the Border Defenders march in the middle of the desert, wave American and DON’T TREAD ON ME flags, and do donuts in their cars while firing automatic weapons. In a particularly unhinged sequence, a man in a pickup truck talks big game about how anyone trying to enter the United States illegally will be entering hell, how Americans are not to be messed with—his sentences punctuated by seemingly involuntary discharges of his weapon. As if this weren’t enough, we are shown signs on fences bearing slogans like “Does my American flag offend you? Call 1-800 LEAVE THE USA” and “The price of freedom is eternal vigilance.”Another two-channel video installation on view, Fridge-Freezer (2015), is a dreamlike portrayal of three realtors attempting to sell nearly identical versions of a prefab house in the suburbs of Manchester, UK. The women exaggerate the selling points, and between pitches they suffer seizures, crying fits, and panic attacks in the homes’ staged interiors. In Okón’s carefully crafted scenarios, these women seem tormented by the fakeness of the dream they peddle. Elsewhere in the same room, a one-minute video of a model of a Banana Republic store going up in flames, República Bananera (2019), played on a screen near the charred remains of a fiberglass zebra, elephant, and clothes. The critique that supposedly tied together the two installations in this room was flimsy: could the aspirational vices of consuming midrange clothing and dreaming of three-bedroom homes be the root of our problems? That Okón’s critique of the neoliberal system often involves castigating members of classes less fortunate than his own appears to be no coincidence, considering his recent interview with Aristégui Noticias, a local news site, in which he claimed that capitalism and market-centric logic could work, just not in their evil neoliberal versions. A little exploitation is OK. Burn it all down—as the text accompanying the exhibition proposed—but maybe not all of it. This article appears under the title “Yoshua Okón” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 87–88.
ArtNews℗Juanita McNeely's Multi-Panel Paintings Channel Harrowing Medical Traumas℗Julian Kreimer℗ArtinAmerica℗03/03/2020℗℗Juanita McNeely’s exhibition, her first at James Fuentes, comprised two large multi-panel paintings that transmit the pain of their female subjects with an intensity that is almost too much to bear and a painterly confidence that makes it hard to look away. McNeely, now eighty-four, has been a practicing painter since she was a teenager. Her 1967 arrival in New York from the Midwest coincided with the growth of second-wave feminism, and she actively participated in groups like Women Artists in Revolution and the Redstockings. McNeely conjures the brutal pressure of existing in a repressive culture through her morphing of imagery, while remaining deeply immersed in traditions of figurative painting.Is It Real? Yes It Is (1969) consists of eight rectangular panels surrounding a larger square one, all depicting different moments in a female figure’s nightmarish medical scene. As in Max Beckmann’s paintings, which McNeely studied closely as an art student in St. Louis, thick black lines define contours and colors skew to unsettling hues. In most of the panels, warm siennas, purples, and black jar against cool acid yellows and hospital mint greens.The work speaks to McNeely’s own trauma as a young artist, when she was diagnosed with a malignant tumor while pregnant and her life was in the hands of doctors unwilling to operate because of the risk to her fetus. Though she eventually had the operation, the experience was harrowing, and she channels its horror here. In the central canvas, a female figure lies on a hospital bed with her legs in stirrups, a tube stuck in her mouth, and her eyes shut. She is surrounded by pelvic X-rays, medical lights, and, incongruously, a sailor-capped Donald Duck, his arms upraised as if in a cruel taunt. From a small slit in the flat blue background emerges a hand gripping a pair of forceps pointed at her genitals. One panel, painted from the perspective of the patient, depicts three masked doctors seen through a tangle of tubes and lights, while another shows a trio of black buzzards clawing and shredding the flesh of a lifeless body, which casts a giant phallic shadow.The show’s other work, Triskaidekaptych (1986), comprises thirteen large panels that wrapped around the corner of the front gallery. The enormous scale of the work seems designed to prove a point: McNeely painted the canvases four years after suffering spinal damage in a fall that left her reliant on a wheelchair. Each panel shows a figure in a strange space: some are eerie landscapes with elongated cypresses; others, fractured interiors with windows askew. Scumbled paint throughout leaves traces of earlier layers, giving the scenes an ominous undertone. Thin black bars hold figures in contorted positions, while a grouping of spikes forms a bed for a flayed horse. In one panel, a human body hung by its ankle from the ceiling has been torn open—a mess of bloody bones and viscera. As in many paintings throughout McNeely’s career, the toes are at once splayed out and bent, powerfully conveying the sensation of extreme pain. The wonderful paradox of McNeely’s work is that it takes an enormous vital energy—a combination of rigor and wildness—to depict this kind of despair.
ArtNews℗Dorothea Lange's Photography Captured the Despair of a Country Divided by Inequality℗David Markus℗ArtinAmerica℗02/03/2020℗℗Near the entrance to this exhibition of work by trailblazing twentieth-century documentary photographer Dorothea Lange we confront the image of a migratory cotton picker, whose calloused palm hides his mouth from our view, as though to signal his reticence. The image dovetails with a nearby wall text, in which Lange conveys her desire to photograph the underprivileged without taking their privacy and dignity from them. But it also suits an exhibition that contains fewer words than one might expect from a show titled “Dorothea Lange: Words & Pictures.” Undoubtedly, we learn about the importance of words to Lange’s photography from the wall texts. There are also some vitrine-bound selections of Life magazine stories to which she contributed, a brief glimpse into Archibald MacLeish’s poetic “illustration” of her work, and reading areas with perusable copies of the text-heavy catalogue. But alongside the photographs themselves, there are surprisingly few examples of the captions and text that Lange and her husband-collaborator, the agricultural economist Paul Schuster Taylor, described as integral to their practice. The exhibition’s theme is perhaps most clearly demonstrated in the section titled “Pictures of Words,” where photographs of a sign warning against vagrancy and of a racist Southern Pacific railroad billboard (“it takes 8 tons of freight to k.o. 1 jap”) register the persecution of the poor and the nonwhite within the discourses of state power and commerce.Fortunately, Lange’s photographs speak volumes on their own. She produced many of her most recognizable images for the Farm Security Administration during and after the Great Depression: the last period in American history when income inequality resembled what it has become in recent decades. There are glimpses of workers asserting their power, such as Lange’s documentation of San Francisco’s 1934 May Day rallies, but these are few and far between. More often we find signs of despair, as in Woman of the High Plains, Texas Panhandle (1938), which captures a woman with her face puckered and her hands gripping her forehead and neck. Or else we see folks simply getting on with the hard realities of working life, as with the line of field laborers in Near Westley, California (1938). Alongside the plowed but unpeopled farmland in Tractored Out, Childress County, Texas (1938), a helpfully included caption by Lange and Taylor informs us that tractors displaced not only mules but human workers.In a section on Lange’s iconic 1936 Migrant Mother photograph we learn that the weathered face before us is that of a woman of Cherokee descent—a fact unknown during Lange’s life, and one that might have affected the work’s legacy. Here, as is often the case in Lange’s pictures, the subject’s hand—positioned in proximity to her face—lends the image its expressive power. In a lesser-known photograph from a series documenting California’s racist justice system and shot between 1955 and 1957, a black defendant clutches his head despairingly, his blurred fingers signaling what his covered face cannot. In a different corner of the same gallery, an intervention by contemporary artist Sam Contis responds to this facet of Lange’s work, presenting multiple photographic details of the hands of her subjects.Some of the most striking photographs on view are Lange’s images of young people: a black girl metaphorically imprisoned behind an ivy trellis; a solemn-faced white girl whose hands grip a barbed-wire fence. Many children of this era would grow up to see better days in the wake of the New Deal and under the more broadly distributed prosperity of the postwar period. Gazing at their faces, we are made to wonder if the same will hold true for the children of today.
ArtNews℗Troy Brauntuch’s Latest Show Brings Viewers Face-to-Face with One of History’s Darkest Chapters℗Alexander R. Bigman℗ArtinAmerica℗26/02/2020℗℗The centerpiece of Troy Brauntuch’s exhibition, “A Strange New Beauty” (all works 2019 or 2020), is a set of thirty-two photo-engravings depicting installations of academic landscapes, neoclassical nudes, and equine statues in the marble-accented galleries of a conspicuously empty museum (A Strange New Beauty [32 Prints]). Handwritten numerical annotations indicate that the source images are archival, but Brauntuch transforms them into something more ambiguous: he not only reproduces these photographs as sumptuous, velvety prints, but tonally inverts them, an alteration that imbues elements like bronze sculptures and shadows with an eerie glow, and gives the distinctly old-world setting an otherworldly, ominous cast. Such morbid intimations are appropriate. The prints are based on digitized photographs of the Great German Art Exhibitions (GDK): shows mounted annually by the Nazi regime between 1937 and 1944 as doctrinal counterpoints to its better-known (and better-attended) exhibition of “degenerate” modernism in 1937. What makes this reference so disturbing is, of course, the fact that the Nazis used the exhibitions Brauntuch depicts to legitimize a program of genocide and imperialist crusading. Also unsettling, however, is the ordinary conservatism of the art favored by the National Socialist elite. Most of the works that appear in Brauntuch’s reproductions would not look out of place in the period rooms of many European and American museums today. The possibility that viewers would misrecognize the source material was evidently important to Brauntuch, who took care to avoid and, where necessary, efface inscribed swastikas, portrait busts of Hitler, and other such identifying markers from the photographs. A facing group of five digital prints, A Strange New Beauty (White Cases), consists of more obviously composite images. Each depicts a statue of a female nude by the Nazi-sponsored sculptor Josef Thorak, rendered transparent by Brauntuch, rising behind a glazed display case. The image of the container came from the GDK archive, but Brauntuch has digitally edited its contents, as well as the various combinations of artworks that convincingly appear reflected in its glass panes. What gives the fakery away is the presence in each vitrine of a women’s shoe from Chanel—whose eponymous founder was a notorious Nazi sympathizer—sourced from advertisements printed on the second page of the New York Times between 2014 and 2015. In the original clippings, framed nearby (Selected Shoes), the front-page headlines—G.O.P.’S PATH TO PRESIDENCY, TIGHT BUT REAL; YOUNG PALESTINIANS FAN FLAMES OF NEW UPRISING—loom behind the elegant footwear ads, figuring the twenty-first-century political anxieties that tacitly suffuse the exhibition as a whole. This is well-trodden territory for Brauntuch, who famously appropriated a set of Hitler’s architectural sketches as part of his contribution to Douglas Crimp’s 1977 “Pictures” exhibition. Brauntuch’s early work provocatively captured an incipient sense that the past’s remove from the present was not as definite as it had once seemed. Why the artist has returned to this material today, a moment marked by rising right-wing nationalisms around the world, is hardly mysterious. Yet Brauntuch’s exquisitely polished prints have a frustrating opacity. This is perhaps the point: he brings viewers face-to-face with one of history’s darkest chapters while insistently withholding the iconic and moral signposts we expect. Brauntuch eschews the sort of viewing guidelines—historicizing captions, narrative framings, emotional cues—that all too readily consign their subject matter to the past, obscuring how certain strains of fascist ideology persist in the present, and maybe even intermingle with more commonplace expressions of conservatism in the domains of visual and material culture. In their spectral pallor, Brauntuch’s prints suggest that we are looking at a revenant. This article appears under the title “Troy Brauntuch” in the March 2020 issue, p. 82.
ArtNews℗Zach Lieberman Looks for Joy on Coding’s Horizon℗Aaron Rosen℗ArtinAmerica℗26/02/2020℗℗Paul Gauguin once recorded a salty exchange with an art critic who had the audacity to ask to see his sketchbooks. “My drawings?” the painter replied. “Never! They are my letters, my secrets.” One wonders what Gauguin would have made of the new media artist and programmer Zach Lieberman. Unlike his furtive precursor, Lieberman has gone out of his way to share his secrets, developing open-source tools for creative coding.“Future Sketches,” Lieberman’s exhibition on view at Artechouse in Washington, D.C., through March 1, uses drawing as a guiding motif. He declares in an online interview with the gallery, “this installation is like my sketchbook and I’m inviting people to come inside.” He goes on to describe the sequences of code he composes daily as “sketches” or “short poems,” with their own texture and lyricism. To those unfamiliar with computational art, these statements might seem far-fetched. The exhibition succeeds—and it does not do so uniformly—when it renders this proposition plausible for audiences, suggesting that the clickety-clack of keystrokes may not be so far removed from the sweep of a brush across a canvas.In Sketch Lab, as the first room in the exhibition is called, visualizations of Lieberman’s daily “sketches” of code bounce around the walls as projections. Some are tubular formations, like Léger paintings rotating in space, while others—overlapping geometric shapes—recall Man Ray’s “rayographs” from the 1920s, in which the outlines of everyday objects produce abstract compositions. At times, seeing the rapid succession of these short, rainbow-colored animations feels a bit like being trapped in a nineties screensaver. The pulsing soundtrack may augment the experience at the mezzanine bar, but it does little to enhance the poetic qualities the artist describes. Down a hallway and wedged beneath a stairwell, a short documentary plays, in which Lieberman speaks movingly and insightfully about his process, leading one to wish clips from the piece could have been interspersed with the “sketches” for context.The next room, the Code Lab, features projects Lieberman made with students at the School for Poetic Computation (SFPC), an initiative he and Taeyoon Choi founded in 2013 to offer intensive classes on creative coding. These works invite viewers to engage intuitively with computational systems. In one piece, set up like a diptych, participants rotate dials to adjust numerical values. Doing so alters a visible stream of code on the right screen while, on the left, the changes to the code take visible shape, creating fresh permutations of historic works of art. Some of the source images, like the Op art paintings of Bridget Riley, appear almost destined for these interactions, which seamlessly extend the logic of the original works. Turning the canon into code becomes an act of radical generosity, which invites any viewer to participate as co-creator, potentially changing not only spatial coordinates but symbolic values and associations as well.This interactive dimension is accentuated in successive installations. Audiences are invited to use analog devices seemingly plucked from old classrooms—overhead projectors, magnetic poetry, megaphones—into which the artist has breathed new, digital life. When they move physical objects, mapped and recognized by a sensor, animated images dance around these shapes with audible plinks and plonks. Singing or shouting generates hypnotic waves of color. The more uninhibited the viewer, the greater the reward. Little kids loved it.In the final room, entitled Face Lab, art historical in-jokes abound. In a series of digital wall pieces, cameras enabled with facial recognition technologies capture viewers and re-present them with live alterations, turning their features into everything from Arpian blobs to Suprematist squares. It is a sign of the artist’s commitment to collaborative practice that the algorithms behind some of these interventions are composed by Lieberman’s colleagues at the SFPC. And it is clear that even some of the ostensibly simple visual effects achieved by the designers represent precocious achievements in coding. Younger viewers especially, schooled in the solipsism of selfie culture, seem to love this room. There is even a sort of mise en abyme effect as visitors snap photos on smart phones of other viewers taking selfies, as everyone is captured by facial recognition software.Still, for all this jouissance, there is something darker at play in an era in which facial recognition has become a favored surveillance tool of law enforcement agencies across the world. Two display screens present a video essay by Jessica Helfand, reproducing the creepy illustrations of early phrenologists, who believed they could unpuzzle the secrets of intelligence, criminality, and mental illness by studying cranial variations in their (often unwilling) subjects, categorized by race. Unfortunately, with so much activity in the surrounding area, hardly any viewers lingered to absorb this material, missing an opportunity to draw deeper connections between the horrifying mis- and disinformation of the past and its reverberations in the present.While amusing in the context of this exhibition, it is not hard to imagine a future for such technology that delivers on the dreams of twentieth-century eugenicists. It was unsettling to observe how many parents were delighted to watch the glowing screens of Face Lab map their children’s countenances. Such unfiltered faith in art is rare. But should art place so much of its own faith in technology? Lieberman seems to wager that artistic interventions may demystify and democratize such tools before they become fully integrated into the culture by less transparent and accountable corporate and political forces. But the danger remains that even well-intentioned artists may end up normalizing such technology in the very attempt to reconfigure it.
ArtNews℗Vivian Suter's Painting-Based Installations Register the Volatility of Nature℗Elizabeth Fullerton℗ArtinAmerica℗25/02/2020℗℗In 1982, seeking refuge from the pressures of early art-world success, the Swiss-Argentine artist Vivian Suter moved to Panajachel, Guatemala, a remote village situated on the edge of a volcanic lake ringed by mountains. In the four decades since, she has exhibited only sporadically, though her vibrant abstract paintings have attracted increased attention in the past several years. As is vividly illustrated in Rosalind Nashashibi’s 2017 film Vivian’s Garden, an intimate study of the precarious Eden where Suter and her mother, the artist Elisabeth Wild, live with their three dogs, Suter paints in her tropical garden, leaving her canvases exposed to the elements outdoors (Elisabeth Wild died at home in early February; she was 98). She adopted this practice after her studio was devastated by a hurricane in 2005, the event leading her to embrace nature’s vagaries rather than try to resist them. Suter conjures this environment in her immersive exhibitions by hanging her large-scale unprimed canvases in a manner suggestive of the haphazard crowding of dense vegetation: at odd angles, partly obscured, chopping up the space, close to the ceiling, and sprawling in piles across the floor. Suter’s exhibition at Camden Arts Centre—titled “Tintin’s Sofa,” in reference to one of her dogs—invites visitors to navigate their own meandering paths through a profusion of swirling colors and organic forms. Around two hundred unstretched canvases are displayed across two rooms and part of a hallway, each turn unfolding new perspectives. The artist created an additional installation for the garden: she constructed a wooden lean-to with open sides in which eight canvases hang from racks in back-to-back pairs, exposed to the winter London weather. Uprooted from the wilderness where Suter created them to this small urban garden outside the gallery’s glass-fronted café, the works look forlorn and abandoned. In the brightly lit galleries, however, a similar hanging arrangement is more effective, with paintings closely suspended from a rack so they can be only partially glimpsed, sidelong, as flashes of color. Suter’s canvases exert a powerful sensory impact that is heightened by their unconventional, almost chaotic presentation: displayed in overlapping clusters and lacking titles and dates, the paintings are experienced collectively, each one inseparable from the others. Her free approach is further evidenced in her varied handling of paint, which at times recalls the nebulous pastel washes of Helen Frankenthaler and the tangled brushwork of Joan Mitchell, incorporating gestural brushstrokes, drips, spatters, biomorphic blobs, geometric blocks, and thinly applied swaths of peach, teal, and fuchsia. The overall impression is one of physical energy conveyed in rapid, loose sweeps of pigment across the canvas.Suter’s paintings capture the kaleidoscope of changing light in her jungle garden: gray blocks on green evoking dappled sunshine streaming through leaves, diffused mauve outlines suggesting twilight or the darkening sky before a storm. Sometimes figurative elements creep in, such as a palm frond or a window grid silhouetted against ocher. Vertical curving shapes resemble shadows of humans flitting around within the encroaching foliage. Left visible on the surfaces of the canvases, which are often creased and curling at the edges, are traces of nature: animal paw prints mingle with insect trails, rain, twigs, and dirt. These random markings are in fact integral to Suter’s approach, injecting the works with decorative texture and vitality, while offering a stark reminder of the fragility of existence in her volatile environment. This article appears under the title “Vivian Suter” in the March 2020 issue, p. 89.
ArtNews℗Senga Nengudi’s Works Stretch, Contract, and Breathe New Purpose into Found Materials℗Scott Roben℗ArtinAmerica℗24/02/2020℗℗Among an array of archival documents and photos in a vitrine at the entrance to the Lenbachhaus’s Senga Nengudi exhibition lay an early artist’s statement that began: “I am working with nylon mesh because it relates to the elasticity of the human body. From tender, tight beginnings to sagging end.” The statement is dated 1977, when a thirty-four-year-old Nengudi was beginning to exhibit what would, many years later, become her most iconic body of work: the “RSVP” series. The works from that series comprise pairs of pantyhose variously filled with sand, knotted, and adorned with additional materials, and pinned to the walls or ceiling so that they stretch and dangle sensuously, at once corporeal and phantasmic. They are, depending on the context, sculptures, architectural interventions, dance partners for performers, and objects that suggest ritual use—sometimes all at once. Installed throughout the Lenbachhaus’s galleries, they were the beating heart of this exhibition: an ambitious, sensitive survey, titled “Topologies,” that focused on the artist’s output from the 1970s and ’80s as well as her return in recent decades to some of the formats she explored during that time. Nengudi’s works in any medium convey an expansive sense of possibility as they stretch, contract, and breathe new purpose into found materials and places. The show commenced with two of her earliest bodies of work before letting go of any strict sense of chronology. Around 1970 the Chicago-born, California-raised Nengudi, then based in Los Angeles, began showing her “Water Composition” works, volumes of colored water that she heat-sealed into clear vinyl, creating baglike pieces that were sometimes geometrically shaped but often veered toward the formless. The first three works in the series (all ca. 1970) were reproduced for the exhibition. The flaccid, half-filled vinyl forms are draped over thick ropes fastened to the wall that tug them upward from the floor. Viewers at the original showings of the “Water Compositions” were invited to touch and prod them, the artist emphasizing the works’ bodily mutability.In the years that followed, Nengudi exhibited the “Water Compositions” in California and Switzerland, but avoided showing them in New York, sensing that black audiences there would receive abstract works like these as apolitical. “That would have gone over like a lead balloon,” Nengudi recalled in a 2013 oral-history interview with Elissa Auther that has been republished in the exhibition catalogue. Thus, when she moved to New York’s Spanish Harlem, where black nationalism was prominent in the political landscape, and began cutting two-dimensional human figures out of cloth designed for flags, Nengudi may have been responding to local pressures to work representationally.She used cords to lash the silhouettes to posts and scaffolding in alleyways (Red Devil [soul 2], 1972) or off of her own fire escape (Drifting Leaves, 1972), so that they swayed slightly, ghostlike, in the wind. The exhibition was the first time the documentation of these works had been shown publicly. Despite their apparent incongruity with the “Water Compositions” in terms of their approach to the body, these works similarly rely on a physical tension produced by cords that tug and on a give-and-take with aspects of their environment—wind, temperature, gravity, the audience. In retrospect, these qualities seem to suggest openings into the dance- and performance-based territory that Nengudi would later enter.These same characteristics, however, marked Nengudi’s place within an emerging circle of black artists dealing with abstraction in sculpture. In 1977, she exhibited the “RSVP” works at New York’s Just Above Midtown (JAM), a gallery founded by Linda Goode Bryant that had recently developed into one of the city’s most important hubs for contemporary black art. Nengudi’s solo show ran as part of a series of exhibitions that year at JAM titled “Afro-American Artists in the Abstract Continuum of American Art: 1945–1977.” In an essay about the series, reprinted in the “Topologies” catalogue, Bryant named Nengudi, David Hammons, Susan Fitzsimmons, Gini Hamilton, and others as new members of the “Contexturalists,” a group of artists who were defining zones of interchange between their works and external phenomena—such as the moving air and gravity that activated Nengudi’s early pieces—as crucial sites of meaning. Bryant’s analysis hews closely to formal observation, yet her insistence on understanding the artwork’s form as interdependent with a host of “marginal elements” gestures toward layers of social and symbolic implications. For example, in unpacking the role of tension, which is everywhere in Nengudi’s work, it’s hard to ignore another statement from the artist’s 1977 statement on the “RSVP” pieces: “After giving birth to my own son, I thought of black wet-nurses suckling child after child—their own as well as those of others, until their breasts rested on their knees, their energies drained.” Nowhere in the works highlighted in “Topologies” was the margin more activated as a space of transformative potential than in Ceremony for Freeway Fets, an unrehearsed 1978 public performance that Nengudi staged in one of LA’s most marginal spaces: beneath the freeway, amid traces of the city’s roaming homeless population. Nengudi conceived the piece as a ritual that would ease frictions between female and male energies in the black community at the time. Imagining the area beneath the freeway as an African landscape, the performance mapped a mythical past onto an overlooked space in the present in order to open a pathway to collective healing. The performance was represented in the exhibition by way of documentary photographs. In one striking image, Nengudi wears a hard hat as she wraps the columns supporting the overpass with knotted nylon mesh garlands—a kind of consecration of the territory before the ritual. In others, she, Hammons, and artist Maren Hassinger move about in masks and costumes, while other people play music or look on.Many of the works Nengudi produced over the decades have disappeared, often because they were never intended to last beyond the here and now of their original context. When she returned to the “RSVP” series in the early 2000s, at the urging of her friend and fellow artist Lorraine O’Grady, she avoided remaking many of the earlier pieces. (“How are you going to find a found object from 20 or 30 years ago?” she mused to Auther.) The unavailability of much of the earlier work may play a role in the curatorial decision to avoid a chronological layout for the installation, yet there seems to be something deeper at stake. Ritual and ceremony, which are central to Nengudi’s approach, operate according to their own sense of time, one that is not about a forward march but about repetition and reconnection. There is something, then, in the gesture of returning decades later to an earlier stage that seems to mirror the work’s deeper structures. It is moving to watch Hassinger, with whom Nengudi has collaborated for nearly forty years, continue to dance with Nengudi’s sculptures. In a projected video, Hassinger performs a dance around R.S.V.P. X (2014), circling it, prodding it, coaxing it. The object becomes like a finely crafted instrument, or even a lover, responding to the sensitive touches of one who knows its idiosyncrasies. Nengudi’s privileging of the open-ended, intimate response (“Répondez s’il vous plaît”) over the pursuit of a conclusion remains one of her work’s most basic yet radical propositions. This article appears under the title “Senga Nengudi” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 77–79.
ArtNews℗Fake Kardashians and CGI Porn Stars: Heji Shin's "Angel Energy"℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗20/02/2020℗℗Heji Shin’s exhibition at Gaga & Reena Spaulings Los Angeles, “Angel Energy,” pushed deeper into the themes of birth, beauty, and celebrity that she explored in her controversial mural-size portraits of Kanye West in 2018 and her gorgeously gory 2016 photographs of crowning babies. In a series of five composited images, “Angel Energy 1–5” (all works 2019), Shin places photos of human infants at the digitally rendered breast of Jedy Vales—a computer-generated “brand ambassador” for the website YouPorn that has been designed as a compilation of users’ most-searched-for traits. In Shin’s prints, she appears in several different guises, all white-presenting: in one, she has a long magenta ponytail and ice-blue eyes; in another, watery green irises and a perfectly bald head. There are even slight variations in her nipples. Vales is, in other words, a malleable fantasy of a narrow kind, representing a statistical mean of desirability. The babies are an ironic addition, turning her into a packaged brand of womanhood.Shin correlates the crowdsourced porn star with another kind of body built for mass consumption, that of the Influencer—and more specifically, the Kardashians. Interspersed among the “Angel Energy” prints were staged photos of Kardashian impersonators, pouting and staring in a generic, bleach-white loft. In one, Thank You for All the Love, a Kim look-alike is shown breastfeeding while on the phone. Almost all the Kardashian women are mothers, but here, it’s their images that have spawned. In the exhibition, the “Kardashians” duck-lipping in their underwear were actors, but the uncomfortable fact is that Shin has access to the real ones. To make another series of works on view, Shin peeled apart Polaroids of the actual Kardashians that she took while photographing them for CR Fashion Book, and printed the ruined film on polished metal panels, titling each print with the first name of its subject. The results recall the formal distortion of Warhol’s bespoke celebrity silkscreens: one shows a high-contrast image of Kris Jenner—Kardashian matriarch—on the phone wearing sunglasses, the contours of her face and hands outlined in bright red; in another, a dark purplish abstraction is all that remains of Kylie, the youngest daughter. These authentic pictures are also, teasingly, the least legible in the show.The ever-visible Kardashians, whose surgically and digitally filtered features have launched a million selfies, may not seem like a radical subject. Yet Shin introduces their profane version of celebrity into an art world still defensive (whether its members admit it or not) about the meaning of “fine art.” You know commerce, like pornography, when you see it. Shin’s ambivalence about the line between commercial work and artwork—a crude allegory of fake and real, image and flesh—continues to provoke her viewers. Two big mural prints anchored the show. In Fake-riarchy, the whole faux-Kardashian clan looks dead at the lens, while “Kim” poses solo in You Killed This, giving the viewer her back (and infamous butt). She’s facing out the window of a warehouse space, maybe in LA, maybe anywhere, taking a photo on her phone. It doesn’t matter if Kim meets your gaze or not; it doesn’t matter if she’s actually Kim. As with the Kardashians, even Shin’s haters can’t resist having a look. This article appears under the title “Heji Shin” in the March 2020 issue, p. 88.
ArtNews℗Arturo Herrera’s Latest Works Reinvigorate Modernist Collage Practices℗Ara H. Merjian℗ArtinAmerica℗20/02/2020℗℗Venezuela-born, Berlin-based artist Arturo Herrera breathes life into well-worn practices of modernist collage, exploring the tensions between exactitude and spontaneity, placement and displacement. As chameleonic as he is consistent, he also plies such tensions in many other mediums, ranging from wall painting to screen prints to stainless steel relief and glass sculpture. This latest show featured a few recent series that employed different formats, scales, and materials yet shared some common tropes—most notably, the playful, partial occlusion of figurative imagery by nonobjective forms, and motifs concerning modern dance and the body’s movement in space. Seven collage works, “I Heard Them and I Still Hear Them/Elements Nº 1–7” (2018), feature materials in arrangements of nested rectangles. Found black-and-white photographs of anonymous individuals engaged in various everyday activities float atop reproductions from a French catalogue of Picasso’s work and pieces of colored paper, the layered compositions pasted onto plywood supports painted in various modes of abstraction. The most salient feature of the pieces is their proliferation of right angles, a quality in many cases enhanced by the artist’s cropping of the Picasso plates. In one collage, Herrera has emphasized the empty space around the Picasso reproduction, using that blankness to set off a rectangular slice of abstraction at left. In the same work, the rippling reflection of an anonymous man wading into water in a photograph rhymes subtly with the black-and-white Picasso reproduction to which the image is affixed. The Spaniard’s legacy informs these works not simply through imagery but also through the anxiety of his influence, both as the preeminent avant-garde artist and the co-originator of modernist collage. In fifteen collages titled “Set Design Studies for Dance/Elements Nº 1–15” (2019), Herrera has created more chaotically organized compositions, layering swatches of painted canvas, screen-printed imagery, photographs of dancers, and strips of felt on pink construction paper. Rather than presenting practical set designs, these studies evoke the potential (and lyrical) intersection of dancing bodies with sets, props, curtains, and other scenographic elements. Here, too, Herrera obscures and reveals in equal measure. A slice of felt descends over the photograph of a dancing figure, leaving only her feet exposed. If the photographs offer glimpses of some larger narrative, their partial concealment reveals the proverbial dance of form—the play of shapes torn from and shorn of context—to be the real subject of the works. Some of the pieces’ formal consonances—an arm rhyming with a wayward felt swatch, for instance—would have benefited from more breathing room. The works were hung in a tight grid that somewhat obscured the cadences within and among the compositions. As optically striking as they are conceptually beguiling, nine works combining glass panels and wall drawings were displayed in the final gallery with enough room around them to accommodate the athleticism to which their title alludes: “Body and Feet Positions in Relation to Line of Dance Nº 1–9.” Based on the imagined trajectory of a dancer across a stage, a single abstract form was drawn at even intervals and the same height on three walls. Before each drawing hung an individual glass plate topped with black glass shapes in different configurations that partially filled in the outline on the wall, evoking the gestures and pauses that punctuate a dancer’s movement. The works’ diagrammatic nature calls to mind graphs or maps, while their conceptual and structuralist dimensions conjure installations by Barry Le Va, Sol LeWitt, and other artists concerned with the potential intellectual depth of flatness. The dance motifs, in other words, become abstracted and schematized, inevitably recalling Duchamp’s glass works. Yet Herrera’s slick panels also have a sensuous materiality: the black areas have a liquid, pooled quality—as if the results of pouring molten glass on the surfaces and allowing it to cool—appearing, by turns, pictorial and sculptural, flat and subtly bulbous. Dance, in short, anchors the artist’s latest series less as an end in itself than as a point of departure for formal and conceptual experimentation, the works shifting between bodily sensuality and cerebral pure form.This article appears under the title “Arturo Herrera” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 86–87.
ArtNews℗For Six Decades, William Christenberry Captured the Ramshackle Vernacular of the South℗Zachary Fine℗ArtinAmerica℗19/02/2020℗℗William Christenberry (1936–2016) is best known for the small color photographs of Hale County, Alabama, he began taking in the 1960s: stark frontal portraits of ramshackle houses, sun-bleached billboards, and trees choked by kudzu. Born and raised in nearby Tuscaloosa, Christenberry spent most of his life out of state—in New York City, Memphis, and, finally, Washington, D.C., where he settled in 1968—but returned to Hale County frequently. He found a way to memorialize the South that showed its mixture of impoverished hurt and beauty without fetishizing ruin. While studying painting and sculpture at the University of Alabama, Christenberry casually took pictures using a Kodak Brownie camera he’d been gifted as a child. His attitude toward photography became more serious in 1960, when he came across Walker Evans’s documentary photographs of Hale County in James Agee’s Let Us Now Praise Famous Men (1941). Evans directly encouraged Christenberry when the two met in the early 1960s, calling his Brownie photographs “perfect little poems.” In “Memory is a Strange Bell,” the Ogden Museum of Southern Art’s compact retrospective of Christenberry’s six-decade-long career, ample space was given to his photographs, but much of the exhibition was dedicated to his forgotten, and often less than successful, attempts at painting, drawing, and sculpture.Throughout Christenberry’s career, and across mediums, he cleaved to certain motifs, particularly Southern vernacular architecture and signage. In early paintings like Fruit Stand (1963), a brightly colored composition depicting crescent-shaped watermelons and drippy boxes of peaches and pears, and Beale Street (1964), a field of crudely painted symbols and storefront signs topped with a collage of advertisements, Christenberry blends the Abstract Expressionist technique he learned as an art student in the 1950s and contemporary trends like Pop that he encountered in New York. While Christenberry’s paintings are rather uneventful—their marriage of styles often feels garbled—his experience working in multiple mediums seems to have benefited his photography, heightening his attention to surface and detail. In 1977, Christenberry started using a large-format 8x10 camera. The resulting placemat-size photos from the 1980s and ’90s preserve his interest in Southern architecture but get closer to its surfaces. In works such as Side of Warehouse, Newbern, Alabama (1980), a wall entirely fills the composition with dented and ripped panels of imitation brick. Buildings in these later photographs are not carefully centered or shown in open space, as with the earlier Brownie pictures; instead, the documentary impulse gives way to one that is more artful, askew.Christenberry’s late artworks engaged with a concern that hovered only imperceptibly at the edge of his photographs: racial terror. References to the Ku Klux Klan appeared in a few of his paintings from the 1960s—including Beale Street, which incorporates an image of three hooded Klan members with menacing empty faces—but it returns in the 1990s as a demon to be rigorously exorcised (albeit to a somewhat tinny effect). In a 1996 series of ink drawings, “K-Houses,” Klan hoods merge into stands of barren trees, while an untitled sculpture from the same year shows a limp Klan member tied by the neck to the base of a tree.  The most compelling nonphotographic works in the show were the architectural models that Christenberry made throughout his career, which suggest votive offerings. Palmist Building (1975–76), for instance, is a gritty model of a clapboard house in Havana, Alabama, that Christenberry photographed repeatedly over the decades. Originally a general store run by his great-uncle, it was taken over by a palm reader, and eventually engulfed in the foliage of a chinaberry tree. The decision to rebuild this dilapidated house in miniature, plank by plank, shows how intentional Christenberry was about the subjects of his work. The buildings he chose were unloved little shrines, symbols of historical wounds and fond personal memories. They were worthy of tenderness and reverence.This article appears under the title “William Christenberry” in the March 2020 issue, p. 87.
ArtNews℗In “Recoding CripTech,” Artists Highlight the Vital Role of Hacking in Disability Culture℗Monica Westin℗ArtinAmerica℗19/02/2020℗℗Exhibitions devoted to access technology often feel like trade shows. Even groundbreaking and progressive institutional exhibitions such as “Access+Ability” at New York’s Cooper Hewitt Smithsonian Design Museum in 2018 tend to focus on projects that treat disability a problem for technology to solve, with updated designs of prosthetics and assistive devices. Instead, “Recoding CripTech,” on view at SOMArts in San Francisco through February 25, focuses on artists’ critical takes on access technology, highlighting the creativity engendered by access needs. The show doesn’t present corrective mechanisms that allow disabled people to conform to normative standards. Instead, the curators liken disability culture’s reclamation of the term “crip” to the ways artists hack and repurpose technology to more accessible and inclusive ends. Access is not only a theme of the works by the twelve artists and collectives, but also a principle of curators Vanessa Chang and Lindsey D. Felt’s exhibition design: the show practices what it preaches.TEMPT (2011–20) is a monumental sculpture of 3D letters that Tony “TEMPT” Quan, a Los Angeles–based graffiti artist paralyzed by Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), created using eye-tracking technology and modeling software. Quan first designed the sculpture, which takes the form of his trademark TEMPT tag, using a program called Eyewriter through a Playstation camera that he hacked. Collaborators Sam Flores and Ronnie Buders then fabricated Quan’s design in foam and cinderblock. The sculpture is on view alongside a single-channel video that shows how Quan made the piece on display. The installation highlights how an artist’s customization of technology is a creative practice in its own right.Many projects in “Recoding CripTech” can be accessed using multiple senses. Wall text recommends touching Jennifer Justice’s haptic sculpture The foot knows the foot when it touches the earth (2019), a set of wooden pallets covered in faux moss and lichen that are studded with three-dimensional models of animal tracks. The entire sculpture vibrates and shakes at regular intervals while playing sounds that mimic human footsteps.In other instances, the curators worked with the artists to provide paraphernalia that translated their work across senses or between mediums. This includes samples of materials used in many of the sculptures and installations offered for tactile engagement, as with two related pieces designed for dancers who use wheelchairs. A photograph and a 3D-printed prototype offered for tactile study accompanied TeamRAMP’s The Ramp (2017), a two-level stage, elegantly connected by a gently sloping ramp that facilitates wheelchair movement. It was shown next to Kinetic Light’s Revel in Your Body (2018), a single-channel video that shows a wheelchair dance duet filmed on the rooftop of an empty parking garage. The show also boasts tactile maps, braille exhibition information, and audio guides with visual description alongside the artworks.Perhaps the most moving work in the show is the series “Crip Couture” (2011–) by Chun-Shan (Sandie) Yi. Yi’s handmade accessories are shown alongside photographs of them being worn by the artist and her crip kin. The works render the disabled and queer body as a site of extreme tenderness, and highlight technology’s role in the art of customized care. Yi’s organic forms and use of latex evoke the Post-Minimalism of Eva Hesse, but take the form of underwear, shoes, and gloves: the latter titled Em-Brace (2011) after an intimate gesture. Designs like Dermis Footwear (2011), a pair of shoes sewn from latex casts of scarred skin, highlight bodily difference rather than erase it. Yi’s wearables undermine the notion of prosthetics or orthotics as devices to make the disabled body conform.Yi’s wearables join several works in the show that consider the intersections of crip and queer experience. In his 2006 book Crip Theory, Robert McRuer argued that the figure of the crip shared affinities with that of the queer: both belong to groups have both been pathologized, both have reclaimed slurs as terms of empowerment, and both can experience rituals like coming out or “passing.” Curators Chang and Felt show how the reclamation of crip identity impacts artists today, while highlighting the central role of technology in art by disabled people. The exhibition is thus both a lab for reimagining more accessible interfaces in exhibition design, and a curatorial argument about technology and identity, highlighting how hacking plays a vital role in crip culture.One key to the show’s success is that it eschews flashy technologies that make grandiose promises, instead addressing the mundane technologies all around us—which some of us have the privilege of not noticing at all. Sara Hendren’s Infrastructure Song (2019), a single-channel sound piece that plays on headphones, layers audio sampled from crosswalk signals designed as wayfinding devices for blind and low vision people. Beeps, chirps, and tones combine with the sounds of cars driving by to create an overwhelming orchestral soundscape that is dissonant and soothing in equal measure. The work raises evocative questions about the cues that move us through designed spaces. How have we been conditioned to tune out unspectacular technologies that are integral to keeping certain people safe? And whose bodies are still not safe? Hendren’s gesture, like many works in the show, recasts crip technological innovation as a creative practice.
ArtNews℗In David Reed’s New Abstract Paintings, Motion Registers as Stasis℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗18/02/2020℗℗Wave your hand slowly and you can see it moving through space. Wave it quickly enough and it starts to look like a big, solid blur. Motion, in other words, can register as motionlessness—not a groundbreaking point, perhaps, but one that’s worth keeping in mind when you look at the new abstract paintings David Reed exhibited at Gagosian. His brushstrokes, or what look like brushstrokes, race over the canvas with such speed, or what looks like speed, that they achieve a smooth, opaque stasis.Small wonder that Reed, who turns seventy-four this year, loves movies. A film camera translates movement into a series of static images; looking at the frames of Eadweard Muybridge’s The Horse in Motion (1877), sometimes interpreted as the first motion picture, you feel kinesis and statuesque stillness at the same time, a paradox that applies equally well to Reed’s #720 (The Prodigal Son), 2013–19, which decorated the Gagosian lobby for the duration of the show. Reed has at times appropriated imagery from famous films, but more often his work recalls film’s formal elements. His long, narrow abstract paintings, divided via thin streaks of paint into cells with the familiar 4:3 ratio, suggest celluloid, and when he produces larger, vertically oriented canvases, he’ll often paint in miniature copies of his own images, arranging them horizontally like loose strips on a flatbed editor. Two decades into the twenty-first century, he paints as if the digital revolution never happened.Studying the canvases in Gagosian’s palatial chambers, it was easy to forget that Reed’s style was born in a moment of crisis. Very roughly speaking, New York painting in the late 1970s demonstrated either the bloat of Pop art or the emaciated legacy of Abstract Expressionism. In the midst of this stagnation, Reed made it his mission to revitalize the brushstroke, which AbEx had exalted and Pop smirkingly rejected. The oil paintings in his bombshell New York debut (Susan Caldwell Gallery, 1975) featured long, viscous lines of red and black that crawled rightward with the calm insistence of sheet music. From here arose a body of work neither glib nor earnest, personal but not quite gestural, technical but not too showoff-y, bolstered by fancy allusions to film and Baroque color theory.This body of work has been extravagantly, sometimes comically praised. In 1994, Dave Hickey turned off his famous bullshit detector to pen a piece in which he linked Reed to everything from sixteenth-century theology to SoCal car culture. It’s certainly refreshing to encounter a painter who seems to have gone his whole career without being tempted by Warholian irony. But I wonder if critics, impressed with his bold leap forward, are too quick to credit him with a smooth landing every time.The more time I spent with Reed’s new paintings, the more expendable their nods to celluloid started to seem. His brushstrokes, meanwhile, stride boldly into the frame, do their little dance, and then, more often than not, lose momentum. The calligraphic black ribbons of #712 (2010–11/2018–19) strut and fret up, down, right, left, and end in cute little ta-das that come off as too neatly balanced within the frame. More often (as in #721 and #717), his lines disappear in a thicket of garish complementary colors. This is what Manny Farber had in mind when he railed against the “square, boxed-in shape and gemlike inertia of an old, densely wrought European masterpiece.” Maybe that doesn’t seem so bad (Farber’s insults have a funny way of sounding like praise), but compare Reed’s latest paintings with the ones he showed in 1975. In the earlier works, motion and stasis are locked in a struggle that dazzles the eye and the mind. This time around, stasis dominates. This article appears under the title “David Reed” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 79–80.
ArtNews℗Suzanne Jackson's Ethereal Acrylic Hangings Connect Autobiography and Abstraction℗Glenn Adamson℗ArtinAmerica℗17/02/2020℗℗Suzanne Jackson’s exhibition at Ortuzar Projects was an autobiography in visual form. Her lush watercolors, like Wormsloe Woods (2004–07), evoke the natural surroundings of Alaska, where she was raised, and Georgia, where she has lived for the past two decades. In her large sculptural hangings—mixed-medium compositions suspended from the ceiling or mounted to the wall—moments of carefully rendered figuration and collaged found objects sit alongside each other, reflecting her early training with the master draftsman Charles White and her involvement in the Black Arts Movement, as both an artist and a gallerist. (From 1968 to 1970 Jackson ran a space called Gallery 32 in Los Angeles. David Hammons, Betye Saar, and Senga Nengudi—then known as Sue Irons—all showed there.) In the late 1970s Jackson applied her skills to a set of outdoor murals in Los Angeles, an experience reflected in a history drawing-cracked wall (2016–19), a large-scale horizontal painting that teems with pictorial incident: faces, hands, even a kitten, all floating in whorls of watery pigment. Her stint as a theater designer in the 1990s is conveyed in works like Blues Garden + Track/Back-Sea (2010), which employ crumpled furls of Bogus paper, a material typically used to protect set and costume elements. She acknowledges deep family ties by incorporating motifs that honor her mother’s quilt-making. One particularly effective example, Hers and His (2018), suggests a coverlet, though its sewn sunbursts and fan shapes float free of any larger pattern.Given her significant accomplishments, the title of Jackson’s exhibition had a fine irony. The show was called “News!”—note the exclamation point. For this was, amazingly enough, the artist’s first-ever solo presentation in New York. After five decades, she is suddenly getting a lot of attention: her first retrospective, for instance, was held last year at the Telfair Museum in Savannah. This isn’t just another belated “discovery” of an under-sung artist, however: Jackson is currently making the most impressive work of her long career. Her breakthrough came around 2013. Always interested in layering colors so they seem to hover in pictorial space—as can be seen in her early paintings, which feature numerous thin washes—she asked herself a difficult question: could she somehow suspend her paint in midair? It turned out she could. The secret was acrylic gel medium—essentially the binder used to make paint—without any pigment in it. Using a palette knife, or simply her hands, Jackson lays this clear liquid down on a flat surface, allows it to dry so that it becomes a membrane, and then adds more on top. As she builds the material up, she introduces paint, various suggestive found objects (beads, peanut shells), and lots of plastic netting. The netting both improves the work’s physical integrity and establishes a wonky grid that serves as a visual baseline for her gestural abstraction.At their best, Jackson’s acrylic works are perfectly balanced between the everyday and the ethereal. Crossing Ebenezer (2017) memorializes a Civil War–era massacre of recently emancipated African Americans; composed primarily of red netting, it suggests both spilled blood and a distressed flag. Light, light into Being (2019) is a polychromatic cascade, a rainbow’s worth of color held in a diaphanous membrane, that more than lives up to its transcendent title. The light that floods through these works lends them a stirring, spiritual quality—a quality of revelation. At the age of seventy-five, Jackson feels at once like an elder stateswoman and like a new arrival on the scene. This article appears under the title “Suzanne Jackson” in the March 2020 issue, p. 83.
ArtNews℗Photographer Mark McKnight Turns Queer Bodies into Abstract Landscapes℗Harry Tafoya℗ArtinAmerica℗14/02/2020℗℗The “body as a landscape” is an infinitely renewable cliché in art, one that draws its power from the collision between shifting human passions and nature’s steadfast indifference. At its best, it inspires work that collapses the distance between our interior sensory world and the environment around us, either imbuing everything with consciousness or recognizing our own as a particularly freaky extension of nature. In a recent discussion with Los Angeles–based photographer Mark McKnight held within his exhibition at Aperture (which had awarded him its 2019 Portfolio Prize), poet and novelist Garth Greenwell touched on what he sees as a great difference in the development of their respective art forms. At the genesis of American poetry was Walt Whitman, a figure who sowed the foundations of the canon with a queer approach to nature and spirituality. Conversely, a pioneer in American photography was Minor White, who depicted American landscapes and people in an expressive manner but sought to suppress his sexuality. As critic and editor Ingrid Sischy once wrote, White “obeyed the conventions of his time, and one of them was that if you were unfortunate enough to love your own sex—which he did—you controlled that information, and certainly didn’t advertise it in your work.”The photographs in McKnight’s Aperture exhibition and in a second show at Klaus von Nichtssagend gave beautiful shape to the sort of queerness that White tried to contain, and to the aesthetic he might have developed had he been in full possession of his self. Portraying the body as formalist landscape and psychological landscape at once, McKnight marries two strains of image-making that on their surface seem like contradictions. If queer formalism in photography is most closely associated with Robert Mapplethorpe’s ultra-kinky, mostly hairless, vaguely fascistic musclemen, McKnight carves his own path by capturing softer-bodied hirsute subjects whose folded flesh, wisps of fur, and pockmarked bellies become abstract landscapes that recall those of masters like White.McKnight’s work is as concerned with negation as it is with affirmation, his images not only exposing their subjects but also anonymizing them. His sleight of hand as a photographer is to confront viewers with the fact of his models’ abjection while presenting it in the space of perfectly composed and gorgeously shot pictures. The twisted, fragmented flesh on display in His Birth (or Black Egg), 2019, and Bodyfold (2018)—at Klaus and Aperture, respectively—has the gnarly corporeality of sculptures by Robert Gober, though it is given the classic gloss of the gelatin silver process.One of McKnight’s greatest strengths is in naturalizing the artificial and aestheticizing the natural, as seen in a number of works at Aperture. Destructive Distillation (Tar Cosmos), 2018, is a portal to the stars found in a puddle of sludge, while the inflatable ball in Spinning Away (2018), with its amorphous red spot, suggests both Jupiter and a very puffy nipple. In Eros (and Erosion), 2018, the camera looms over a backside speckled with psoriasis scars, the bruised flesh finding a sweet analogue with the warped desert earth it rests upon. In its formal beauty, ambient horniness, and casual psychedelia, McKnight’s vision of rugged American landscapes is surpassed only by Georgia O’Keeffe’s.McKnight is not simply a romantic. The palpable warmth he feels for his subjects is paired with an unrelenting starkness of vision. Moral ambiguity lurks in the bleak terrain of pieces like The Black Place and the jagged cliffside of Violence (both 2019 and at Klaus). When an audience member at the Aperture discussion asked McKnight whom he considered to be the equivalent to Whitman in photography, he cited Frederick Sommer rather than White. For his classicism and refined touch, McKnight is a true disciple of Sommer’s gorgeously delirious vision of the desert, merging the physical and psychic to depict the truth of a very modern nature.This article appears under the title “Mark McKnight” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 83–84.
ArtNews℗Julije Knifer's Anti-Paintings Make a Virtue of Monotony℗Rachel Wetzler℗ArtinAmerica℗13/02/2020℗℗When Yugoslavia broke with the Soviet Union in 1948, it jettisoned Socialist Realism in favor of its ostensible antithesis, modernist abstraction. The de facto state style of the 1950s and ’60s was what the literary critic Sveta Lukić called “socialist aestheticism”: an art-for-art’s-sake modernism that stressed formal experimentation above all else, projecting an image of enlightened liberalism as a counterpoint to Soviet dogmatism. Croatian artist Julije Knifer (1924–2004) responded to this affirmative milieu with black irony, riffing on geometric abstraction in “anti-paintings” characterized by a deliberately meaningless monotony. Knifer spent virtually his entire career painting a single motif: a meander pattern formed from interlocking right angles.Knifer began painting the meander exclusively in 1959, around the time he cofounded the Zagreb-based proto-conceptual group Gorgona. Instead of a shared artistic program, the group’s members were linked by what they referred to as the “Gorgonic spirit,” a generally nihilist anti-art stance inspired by existentialist philosophy and the example of local prewar avant-gardes. Their most significant collective project was the “anti-magazine” Gorgona, publishing eleven artist-designed issues—including contributions from Dieter Roth and Harold Pinter—before the group disbanded in 1966; Knifer designed the second issue as a folded loop of connected pages with a continuous meander printed across them. Titled, appropriately, “Meander,” the exhibition of Knifer’s work at Mitchell-Innes & Nash opened with two early pieces, displayed at the entrance, that show him in the midst of distilling his vocabulary, as if working out a problem. In the small, squarish painting Composition 15 (1959), stark black and gray geometric forms of different shapes and sizes create a sequence of right angles across the white ground. On the opposite wall, an untitled grid of thirty small framed collages (1959–61) displayed different configurations of linear black forms on white paper, spanning from an arrangement of vertical stripes to the prototypical meander: parallel verticals joined by narrow horizontal bands. In the main gallery, nine paintings dating from the 1960s to the 1990s demonstrated Knifer’s exploration of the varied possibilities within his rigorously circumscribed schema. In BGS No. 3 (1973), for instance, the meander is a tight row of angular white bends sitting at the center of a black ground, while in the massive diptych Autumn XII (1993), the motif practically consumes each panel, resulting in near monochromes—one white, one black—edged by thin contrasting strips. Though Knifer limited himself primarily to a reductive black-and-white palette, the show included a handful of lesser-known works from a brief period in the late ’60s and early ’70s when he experimented with color, including an untitled painting from 1969, inspired by a visit to a Byzantine monastery, in which a meander hovers overa shimmering gold ground. Knifer’s best works exploit the relationship between the pattern’s suggestion of infinite repetition and the boundaries of the canvas. In the triptych H.d. Tü tri v. 1975 I (1975), a black meander snakes across three adjacent panels, progressively expanding until it fills the work’s rightmost edge. Knifer cannily incorporated the seams between the panels into the composition: they are straddled by extra-wide vertical segments, and rhythmically echoed by the white lines that delineate the pattern’s bends. The meander escapes the frame entirely in Untitled (PM Gallery, Zagreb, Croatia), a re-creation of a 1988 wall mural, though the work lacks the compositional tension that animates architectural interventions like Tü E (Tuebingen Ecke), 1973, in which an unbroken meander, as if absorbing the contours of the room, winds between two canvases placed on adjacent walls in a corner of the gallery. While Knifer’s works are individually compelling, the exhibition makes clear that his meanders are most effective in aggregate, viewed as almost interchangeable segments of a single project. As he wrote in his koan-like 1977 text Notes, “I have probably already created my last paintings, but maybe not yet the first ones.”This article appears under the title “Julije Knifer” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 80–81.
ArtNews℗Rashid Johnson and the Age of Broken Men℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗12/02/2020℗℗A few months ago, my niece drew a human face for the first time. She’s two years old and can barely hold a marker, but I knew immediately what she’d made. Two dots and a dash, and my brain, prepped by eons of evolution, did the rest. Something similar happened to me at “The Hikers,” Rashid Johnson’s recent exhibition at Hauser & Wirth. Faces jumped out of his collages and tile mosaics, whether I was looking for them or not. The more crudely sketched they were, the more unexpected and powerful was my twinge of recognition—more powerful, even, than seeing my own face in the intermittent ruined mirrors of his work.That twinge was the exhibition’s crucial component. It kept Johnson’s recent pieces from projecting total despair and produced, instead, something more difficult and disturbing. The works are a grim successor to Johnson’s earlier “Anxious Men” series. Their names, taken together, sound like a slow, dirgeful chant: Untitled Broken Men, Portrait of a Broken Man, Standing Broken Men, Two Standing Broken Men. In Johnson’s emphasis on “man” and “men,” critics like the Guardian’s Nadja Sayej have detected a nod to the #MeToo movement. I sensed something closer in spirit to the midcentury alienation that inspired Herbert Marcuse’s One-Dimensional Man, Saul Bellow’s Dangling Man, and Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man—i.e., “man” as a synonym for the whole wretched species, a usage as awkard and outdated as it is potent. The figures in Johnson’s mosaics have little individuality, let alone gender: around their jagged mouths and blank, oval eyes lie wastelands of wax, shattered tile and glass, bronze, black soap, and enamel.On these unsteady surfaces, figures are not drawn so much as scratched into being. You can feel Dubuffet and Guston in the thickness and deliberate gracelessness of the lines, but there’s no sense of childish play, not even Guston’s sardonic version. Johnson’s figures suggest no lost innocence or history of any kind; they’ve always been trapped here. To call these broken men untitled is a sick joke: they’re without property or proper name, outside of civilization, alien, invisible.“A stand-in for the human condition,” as their creator described them to Sayej. And especially, it is tempting to add, for the black condition. Johnson, who grew up on the South Side of Chicago, insists that he isn’t trying to “race” his newest works, a statement which perhaps needs some qualifying. Blackness is there, to be sure, but as an implication more than a premise; it’s too elusive to be assumed at the outset. Even when a seemingly obvious signifier shows up, some second meaning complicates the first. The images of cowries and bantu masks in Johnson’s collages, for instance, are symbols of black community and estrangement at once: they evoke racial solidarity but also the distant lands his family couldn’t afford to visit while he was growing up. All three works featuring these motifs bear the same title: Untitled Escape Collage. Johnson’s compositions are chaotic, yet they’re also carefully arranged, models of balance and classical symmetry. For someone who specializes in brokenness, he can be a remarkably lucid, tidy image-maker. In his recent work, the chaos is arranged more tidily than ever, with all the tension this contradiction implies. Sometimes, it’s too much. In Native Son, the Richard Wright adaptation he directed for HBO last year, the violence was dismayingly smooth, Steadicam-smothered à la Steve McQueen. When the tension pays off, however, it inspires transcendent work like The Hikers, the 16mm short that served as the show’s centerpiece. For seven minutes, two masked black men dance across the mountains of Colorado. When they finally meet, lock bodies, and remove their disguises, the encounter is intimate and unsettling in the right proportions. Even in the middle of nowhere they’re being watched, the knots and broken bark of the aspen trees around them forming a mob of pale, unreadable faces.This article appears under the title “Rashid Johnson” in the March 2020 issue, p. 79.
ArtNews℗Internal and External Worlds Merge in Kristy Luck's Atmospheric Paintings℗Leah Ollman℗ArtinAmerica℗11/02/2020℗℗Nature, the body, and the psyche seem to be one in Kristy Luck’s paintings, but there is nothing saccharine or overtly mystical about her unifying vision. The Los Angeles–based artist depicts fields of color pulsing with the vitality of pressures countering one another and then yielding, as entities appear to emerge, merge, and change. Her works evoke generative and transformative processes that are equally at play in internal and external realms, accentuating the continuity between self and the larger world.At the entrance to Luck’s exhibition, “Transformer,” hung an arresting oil-and-wax painting from 2016, Hands, in which a pair of long-fingered aqua-colored hands pushes against or holds up an arched gold plane, perhaps a door. The eleven other works on view (all 2019 or 2020) were less illustrative, more abstractly suggestive. Scale matters, but not predictably. Within small and large paintings alike, Luck oscillates between micro- and macrocosmic perspectives. Forms distilled from botany, geology, and biology—stems, thorns, pods, clefts, abysses, teeth, gums—interact and reverberate in ambiguous space, reading variably as minute and expansive. Each arena is energized by jewel tones, usually spiked with a dose of complementary color. Shapes recur in fugue-like repetitions, and surfaces vary in opacity from foggy to dense.In Cloud Throat, among the most absorbing works in the show, a quiet quadrant of warm gray at the lower right of the canvas is topped with a neat row of tiny trees standing upon a lyrical swale—a little moment of naturalism found amid a scene otherwise characterized by animist ebullience. A series of concentric flourishes blooms in shades of olive, cobalt, and lime at the lower left, while swaying columnar forms morph into vivid, dappled plumes of violet at top. Suspended centrally in the composition is a planetary orb, whose gravitational pull might be responsible for all the tidal action taking place. Human body parts appear amid Luck’s fissures, hillocks, blossoms, and other loose references to the natural world. In Overthinker, a headless, supine female nude radiates glowing petals; below, the back of a silhouetted head in profile extends in stuttering daubed stripes. In Soft Touch, the rectangular canvas as a whole doubles as torso. Two exaggerated, mismatched green arms enter the composition from the sides, palms down against the amorphous middle. White amoebic lungs float above a dark, uterine cavity. Other paintings similarly allude to female reproductive organs, those unseen anatomical parts historically held accountable for women’s moods and behaviors. In Black Sun, a stylized gorge doubles as an internal site of fertilization. Throughout this dazzling exhibition, there was a fluid equivalency between shapes and events inside the body and what happens on the outside as atmosphere, environment, and weather. Luck mines a rich psycho-sensuality, nodding to early twentieth-century transcendental modernists like Agnes Pelton and Henrietta Shore along the way. Her proudly feminine imagery feels like an act of reclamation: why not ovaries as suns, as seeds, as themselves?This article appears under the title “Kristy Luck” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 88–89.
ArtNews℗Andrea Bowers Portrays the Future of Activism℗David Everitt Howe℗ArtinAmerica℗10/02/2020℗℗Andrea Bowers’s interest in social movements and political activism, such as workers’ rights rallies and protests around the proposed Dakota Access Pipeline, is central to her artwork. This can lead to some dissonance in commercial gallery settings. A 2011–12 exhibition of her work at Andrew Kreps took as a departure point The New Woman’s Survival Catalog, a 1973 compendium of practical information for women in the United States, including details about women-run bookstores, health clinics, and other services. Artforum critic Frances Richard criticized the show for a contradiction she saw at the heart of it: visitors were not allowed to look unsupervised through a book of ephemera placed on a table, and this seemed anathema to the egalitarian spirit of the material. Turned into fine art, it had become hands-off.Bowers’s latest show at the gallery, “Think of Our Future,” wasn’t free of such issues, but the central video, My Name Means Future (2020), certainly helped transport viewers away from the esoteric white-cube context. The protagonist is a teenage member of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe in South Dakota named Tokata Iron Eyes. Her unassuming, seemingly unrehearsed demeanor lent the video an accessible quality. In drone footage, Bowers recorded Iron Eyes describing some local landmarks sacred to her, as well as her background as a young Indigenous rights activist. Standing in the unremarkable rolling fields that constitute the site of the 1890 Wounded Knee massacre and mass burial ground, Iron Eyes mentions that one baby survived the slaughter to become her great-great-grandfather. Bowers’s camera variously zooms in on Iron Eyes’ face, swoops around her from afar, and frames her silhouette within wide shots of the surrounding landscape.Describing her philosophy on nature—it can’t be owned, and every object has its own autonomous life force—Iron Eyes pauses to collect her thoughts, smiles awkwardly, and gesticulates in the relentless prairie winds. She wears a T-shirt that reads PHENOMENAL WOMAN—a costume choice that feels authentically her own, even if it aligns with themes in Bowers’s past work. The video offers a tender, selfless portrait of a woman Bowers considers a model for future political engagement. Hung on the walls around the video projection were new neon pieces in which curling, glowing green depictions of sycamore branches surround “ecofeminist” quotes. One spells out, THE EARTH DOES NOT BELONG TO US / WE BELONG TO THE EARTH, a message commonly found on bumper stickers made by Earth First!, a radical environmental advocacy group, while another work features a spreading branch with a statement tweeted by Honor the Earth executive director Winona LaDuke: LET US BE THE ANCESTORS OUR DESCENDANTS WILL THANK. While these neons are lovely, they seemed decidedly commercial in comparison to the video—like bright, shiny baubles tailor-made for the living room wall. Downstairs, meanwhile, were two large acrylic-on-cardboard works that reconceive historical illustrations of women. One is based on an image by writer and artist Walter Crane for his poem The Sirens Three (1886) that depicts three women swirling around a sailboat motif. Bowers recast Crane’s illustration as an indictment of climate change, swapping in a desiccated landscape for the boat and turning the globes the women hold into representations of a dying planet Earth. While this and the other two-dimensional objects in “Think of Our Future” were well executed, they seemed secondary to the video, which was given rightful pride of place: earnest and optimistic, it unfolds slowly, wrapping viewers in a narrative that’s mournful and hopeful at once.This article appears under the title “Andrea Bowers” in the March 2020 issue, pp. 81–82.
ArtNews℗Gareth Long Puts a Spotlight on the Grift of Local Entertainment–and Dabbles in It, Too℗Sean J. Patrick Carney℗ArtinAmerica℗07/02/2020℗℗Tucked away on the second floor of Houston’s Blaffer Art Museum is Kidnappers Foil (2014), a mildly cacophonous, anachronistic video installation by Canadian conceptual artist Gareth Long. Looping on the gallery’s walls and several suspended screens are eerily similar, distinctly American midcentury black-and-white amateur films. Highly compressed, these digital translations of disintegrating film cuts appear both grainy and pixelated. Each offers a hammy, provincial twist on an identical narrative: a young girl is kidnapped; her father offers a reward; local children band together to rescue her; the town celebrates her eventual liberation with an unpolished talent show.As the short films play side by side, imperfections in the inexpertly replicated narrative grow apparent. Though the scripts are interchangeable, the scenes vary wildly in length. The versions don’t end at the same time. This makes for a clunky, disorienting viewing experience. Once the longest running iteration finally fades to black, the room goes quiet, offering a welcome, but awkwardly long, two-minute breather. Then the space bursts alive again with the disorderly sounds of dozens of white children tunelessly singing “London Bridge” as flickering title cards announce “The Local Gang” starring in Kidnappers Foil.The Toronto-based Long, whose iterative and appropriative artist-as-editor practice frequently involves reconfiguring existing media, did not produce these movies. They are the work of Melton Barker, a little-known itinerant filmmaker who was based in Dallas. Armed with a simple original script and a portable moviemaking studio, the hardworking and hard-drinking Barker zigzagged the heartland continuously from 1936 until his death on the road in 1977. Capitalizing on rural dreams of Hollywood glamour, Barker claimed he’d discovered Spanky McFarland of Hal Roach’s popular “Our Gang” series. In small towns across Texas, Oklahoma, and beyond, Barker placed newspaper advertisements, recruiting local youth to pay a fee and audition for a part in The Kidnappers Foil. Children who made the cut could later see themselves on the big screen at their local movie theater—provided they purchased a ticket. Caroline Frick, a film scholar and founder of the Texas Archive of the Moving Image, estimates that Barker remade The Kidnappers Foil hundreds of times; she has located and digitized nearly two dozen versions.In his artist’s statement, Long cites “copying, seriality, amateurism, stupidity, translation, and collaboration” as central themes of his work. Barker’s frenzied filmmaking embodies all these concerns to various degrees, so it’s no wonder Long was drawn to the dilettante director’s obsessive, redundant opus. For his work Don Quixote (2006) Long used an imperfect speech recognition software program and an audiobook of Cervantes’s novel read by veteran voice actor George Guidall to create a stupid new translation of the classic. He has fabricated puerile replications of Martin Kippenberger sculptures from papier-mâché. He spent five years producing sculptural interpretations of a two-seated desk from Flaubert’s unfinished satire Bouvard et Pécuchet, about a pair of copy clerks with near-identical mindsets. When it comes to repetition, Long seems more interested in the asinine than the appreciable. Tautology is a joke, not a meditation.Barker’s serial filmmaking couldn’t have been very meditative. The repetition borders on manic. There is a hilarious rumor that he openly hated children. I imagine Barker as somewhat like Kenny Powers—the notoriously volatile, has-been baseball pro played by Danny McBride on HBO’s “Eastbound & Down” (2009–13)—a delusional, self-aggrandizing, wannabe visionary brimming with contempt for the plebes and kids surrounding him. But like Powers, somehow Barker isn’t an entirely unsympathetic character. The Kidnappers Foil sure feels like a swindle, but a relatively harmless one. It’s true that nobody ever achieved stardom after appearing in one of Barker’s films, despite his hinting at the contrary. But thousands of Americans in flyover states enjoyed the rare opportunity to see themselves and their community represented on the silver screen. The vertical integration business model Barker employed required making the same wonky film over and over again—only the locals who paid to participate in a given iteration would also pay to see it in the theater.Aptly, Long’s presentation is itself an iteration. The project debuted in 2014 at Kunsthalle Wien. Long intended, appropriately, to take it on the road. But the touring itinerary never materialized, so this hyper-American, itinerant community portrait ironically seemed destined to appear but once, in Europe. It is entertaining to imagine what a twenty-first-century Austrian art-viewing public thought while watching cornfed American tweens of the Silent Generation stooge their way through an “Our Gang” rip-off. But what’s more enticing—and what feels mildly salacious about the exhibition at the Blaffer—is a creeping and now unshakeable feeling that Long and co-curators Max Fields and Andrew Hibbard have taken a cue from Barker’s playbook, gently hustling a twenty-first-century Texas art audience with the promise of seeing the bumpkin-esque aspects of their home state’s history made marvelously relevant to contemporary art. Americans love a good grift, don’t we?Historically speaking, the surviving prints of Barker’s film project are fascinating vernacular documents. For one, they are extraordinary records of otherwise-lost midcentury American accents. Their utter localness is why the Texas Archive of the Moving Image collects the works. The Blaffer’s website reinforces this, suggesting that in Long’s presentation “individual films emerge as portals into the place of their making.” This is true, to an extent. But Long’s simultaneous projections muddy practically every nuance of difference between versions, save for the variant lengths of any given scene. The different geographic sites get forced into a cyclopean portal, one that’s cloying and country-fried. Rural whiteness serves as a breeding ground for America’s mythologies about itself. Barker’s films are an acute, if unwitting, representation of that fact.Does Long’s reframing of Barker’s oeuvre illuminate difference and locality, or highlight homogeneity? It’s a complicated question, one entailing parallel inquiry into Barker’s own motivations. Was he, as I suspect, a conniving carnie, bilking heartland yokels bit by bit with bogus claims of his networked industry pedigree? If so, I know a few “curators” he’d have gotten along with. Or, was Barker a highly productive, high-functioning working-class alcoholic who wanted desperately to be taken seriously as a professional? That sounds like half the artists I’m friends with. Regardless of my assumptions that favor the former version, we don’t really know exactly how Barker saw himself, which is part of his appeal.Maybe the conflicting possible interpretations are meant to flatter a Texas art crowd, saying that they’re uniquely Texan, but not at all parochial; part of the zeitgeist, but ruggedly individual. Maybe it was a clever way to convince museum funders that a local iteration of Kidnappers Foil was regionally, but not too regionally, significant. Or hell, maybe everybody’s in on the joke: Long, the curators, the museum, the audience—a gigantic circle-grift on a GIF-like loop. Long’s Kidnappers Foil and Barker’s story remind me that incompatible realities coexist easily in America, as if by magic. We’re attracted to grifters because they tell us what we want to hear, regardless of whether or not it makes sense.
ArtNews℗Joseph Sterling’s Mastery of Midcentury Photographic Innovations Was Both a Strength and a Weakness℗Jeremy Lybarger℗ArtinAmerica℗06/02/2020℗℗Joseph Sterling has been consigned to the bush league of midcentury Chicago photographers, whether justly or not. He died in 2010, at age seventy-four, having never received the sort of blue-chip retrospective that helped canonize Ray Metzker and Kenneth Josephson, his contemporaries and fellow students at the city’s legendary Institute of Design. Nor did he have the unusual biography that has made Vivian Maier, a longtime Chicago nanny who took street portraits in her spare time, so irresistible to curators and editors. Sterling’s main series, “The Adolescent Comedy,” a paean to American teenagers of the late 1950s and early ’60s, grew out of his master’s thesis but wasn’t exhibited until 2002. He spent most of his career doing corporate photography gigs, and sometimes taught.But he also continued to make creative work. Stephen Daiter’s recent exhibition featured unseen prints from Sterling’s archive and demonstrated what a versatile photographer he was. The images—all of them black-and-white and most of them untitled and from the 1950s—showcased Sterling’s strengths as well as his shortcomings. He was formally adventurous in his experiments with motion blur, light, and double exposure, yet so promiscuous in style and subject that he seemed to recycle the visual techniques of his era rather than stake out his own themes. His ability to synthesize the innovations of America’s postwar photographic vanguard sensitively and dramatically may have been his greatest gift. In his documentary work, Sterling adapted the social realist tradition of Walker Evans to the new urban underclass. In a photograph not on view but reproduced in the catalogue, three young black boys stroll down a blighted city street, a junked mattress leaning against a building and a shred of newspaper littering the foreground. A black laborer in overalls and an engineer’s cap approaches the boys, the image implying a head-on collision between innocence and experience. A kind of companion photo displayed in the exhibition shows three young black girls clutching each other and screaming at the camera gleefully or in mock fright. The white curtain in the window behind them is askew, and the glass reflects a chunk of Sterling’s silhouette—the photographer insinuating himself into the image in much the way that Lee Friedlander went on to do in the subsequent decades.Generally, though, Sterling seems more imitative than prescient. There’s a hint of Helen Levitt in his unsentimental portrayals of children adrift in the city. His attentiveness to textures and architectural ruin recalls Aaron Siskind, one of his teachers at the Institute of Design. In Sterling’s abstracted, almost calligraphic prints from the 1980s and ’90s, four of which were in this show, there are traces of another teacher, Harry Callahan. And in his nighttime street portraits of often solitary figures, there’s a mood similar to that found in the work of Robert Frank. Even Sterling’s subtle sense of humor calls to mind, say, Leon Levinstein’s.This show suggested that if Sterling wasn’t an innovator himself, he did master the visual grammar of his time to produce work of exceptional variety and skill. Some prints highlighted his technical artistry especially well. A pair of photograms—camera-less images made by placing objects directly on light-sensitive material and then exposing the combinations to light—attested to Sterling’s minimalist sense of composition. Examples from his “Motion Series,” from the late 1950s, revealed a fascination with the lyrical possibilities of light. These blurred images of cityscapes and cars were, ironically, the clearest expression of Sterling’s oblique, restless style.    This article appears under the title “Joseph Sterling” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 91–92.
ArtNews℗Emmet Gowin’s Photographs of the Nevada Test Site Capture a Beauty That Cannot be Domesticated by Art℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗05/02/2020℗℗In the catalogue for a 2002 exhibition of Emmet Gowin’s aerial photographs of landscapes altered by human activity, Jock Reynolds, director of the Yale University Art Gallery, recounts that a friend referred to one of the images as “immorally beautiful.” If only things were so simple—if only morality were always staunchly pro- or anti-beauty, and vice versa. Something stranger happens in the photographs of the Nevada Test Site (NTS) that Gowin took in the mid-’90s. Beauty curls tightly around morality and politics and history, not strangling them outright but squeezing, cracking, and coaxing unlike parts together. Seen one way, these images—the subject of Pace’s small but heady exhibition—depict apocalypse. They may also suggest a beginning, of the kind apocalypse provides: creative destruction, a vast slate-wiping. From 1951 to 1991, the Nevada Test Site, located in the desert some sixty miles northwest of Las Vegas, saw the detonation of several thousand atomic bombs, enough to make the United States by far the most nuked country on the planet. Gowin’s fascination with the area began in 1980 when he was photographing the Mount St. Helens eruption from an airplane and noticed a Manhattan Project facility, the Hanford Nuclear Reservation. A decade of negotiations with the Department of Energy followed. By the time he won permission to shoot classified nuclear zones, the Cold War was over, the NTS had been shut down, and the federal government was shelling out millions to workers who had contracted cancer from the weaponry they’d built. The public was beginning to be more frightened of hurricanes than H-bombs, the delicate creep of annihilation instead of a sudden burst.Gowin’s photographs are rich enough to evoke both kinds of apocalypse, and a few others. Shot in high-contrast black-and-white and rarely printed larger than a foot square, they avoid the easy grandiosity of their subject matter in favor of studious obscurity. It’s often hard to guess how big the mounds and pockets of earth might be; several of the images include no horizon line, which makes it even harder. Occasionally, some familiar object, a tower or a road, gleams reassuringly, but even then there is little sense of scale. Craters we think we recognize from sixth-grade science class turn out to be something else entirely: many of the blasts at NTS took place deep underground, vaporizing millions of tons of sand and sucking down the land on top. Illuminating the landscape throughout the photos is the frank Southwestern sunlight, powered by its own nuclear reactions millions of miles away.The works are beautiful, to the degree that one can understand why the artist has been faulted for aestheticizing a terrible, destructive technology. Faced with this line of attack, Gowin has always seemed politely bemused; at a 2018 lecture sponsored by the Aperture Foundation, he remembered, “A lot of the criticism . . . centered on, ‘How dare you make something beautiful which is so awful?’ And I’m not thinking that I’m responsible for that”—“that” being the beautiful, the awful, or both. Even defenders of the series have an odd tendency to try to make it work out to a morally proper message. Robert Adams, in his introduction to the exhibition catalogue, praises his friend for having the “moral compulsion” required to make “something redemptive” from the material.Gowin has made something of America’s long nuclear nightmare, though redemption seems to have little to do with it. What’s remarkable about the series, instead, is the sense it conveys of a beauty that cannot be domesticated with morality or art because it is too wild to be met head-on—a beauty that has the inevitability of two and two equaling four, and that promises to endure long after the last of us have burned or drowned.This article appears under the title “Emmet Gowin” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 84–85.
ArtNews℗A Show at Tom, Joe, and Rick Potts's Plumbing Store–Turned-Gallery Highlights Their Eclectic Art℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗04/02/2020℗℗In 2016, Potts Plumbing Parts in Alhambra, California, stopped selling pipes and started showing art. The shift came naturally: brothers Tom, Joe, and Rick Potts—who took over the store, which their grandfather opened in 1939, from their parents—are themselves artists. (They’re also founding members of the legendary 1970s fringe-rock collective Los Angeles Free Music Society.) When they decided to hang up their wrenches, as it were, they handed off the storefront to a group of young artists and curators, who turned it into an exhibition space. (Joe and Rick kept studios in the store’s back rooms. Tom moved to Montana.) This show presenting the brothers’ particular home brew of paintings, drawings, and assemblages is the gallery’s final exhibition—a fitting farewell.Tom makes practical concoctions, such as the sign on the building’s facade that spells out the store name in pipes. In the show, a huge rack made of rusty lengths of steel, which he had constructed to hold the shop’s wares, serves as a minimalist sculpture dominating the gallery’s floor. The one piece of dedicated “fine art” by Tom, from around 2005, is a sea turtle shell with skeleton arms and a burl head—a contraption not unlike the jury-rigged custom plumbing solutions for which the Potts store was known.Joe explores the darkness of pop culture in wall-mounted works employing grids. Mirror (Ricci), 2016, for instance, is a horror show in which low-resolution close-ups of actor Christina Ricci are covered in blood-red paint and thick varnish. A nearby work, All-Seeing Eye (2015), comprises a series of twenty text-heavy posters in which Joe describes versions of the oculus—a symbol associated with Lucifer, the Illuminati, Sauron, and the NSA—in the style of druggy conspiracy theories. Hung in a corner of the gallery, a 1994 collaboration between Joe and Rick titled Valentine—in which a sculptural model of a human heart is framed in front of a painted winter landscape—is exhibited in unrestored condition, the work’s red velvet matting practically gray with dust. This deference to the passage of time is the show’s most elegiac touch.Of the brothers, Rick is the most prolific. His toy-based assemblages and markedly lysergic drawings fill the gallery. Highlights include a bizarre untitled acrylic portrait of a man with a corkscrew nose and skeleton body (1976) and a painting of a floating eye (Eye, 1980). The show also includes an assortment of his pen-and-ink fantasias on cheap paper (such as stationery from plumbing wholesalers), which date from the 1970s, when he was in high school, to the early ’90s. One group features images of an anthropomorphic log strolling past a mushroom; a Surrealist-style staircase with a face; and a cut-rate cartoon mouse holding a soda marked DALI. Dissolution tugs at Rick’s drawings, most of which are undated and fragmentary. The characters grin optimistically despite their incompleteness. Maybe, given enough time, the ape-headed skeleton shown playing a log with a saw can carve a violin.In the end, the exhibition, which is titled “Don’t Think,” is less about the individual works than about the heartfelt compulsion of the true artist and the endearing strangeness of life at its most mundane. This show in the Potts family’s plumbing store is likely the most comprehensive retrospective the brothers will ever receive. In other words, it is about the lives of artists as they often really are. This article appears under the title “Tom, Joe, and Rick Potts” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 92–93.
ArtNews℗Using Antique Quilts, Sanford Biggers Creates an Afrofuturist History of the Underground Railroad℗Alpesh Kantilal Patel℗ArtinAmerica℗03/02/2020℗℗The centerpiece of Sanford Biggers’s 2015 solo show at David Castillo, timed to coincide with Art Basel Miami Beach, was the sculpture Laocoön (2015), a balloon figure of Bill Cosby’s comedic cartoon character Fat Albert lying facedown on the ground, attached to an air pump that caused it to expand and contract. The work incited heated debate among critics, some of whom saw it as a crass commentary on the killing of black men like Michael Brown and Eric Garner by police. “Quadri ed Angeli,” his most recent show at the gallery, was as formalist and quiet as the last one was politically topical and sensational, comprising seven new abstract works (all 2019) employing antique quilts.   Two “paintings”—large quilts from which sections have been excised—hung on either side of the gallery. In Somethin’ Close to Nothin’, Biggers has removed two slender curving shapes from a quilt with a red, yellow, and blue lattice pattern, the forms matched by hazy ones painted in black on the quilt’s surface that suggest shadows. Twintriloquism, whose front is patterned with diamond-shaped forms in muted shades of green, yellow, and brown, has a pair of tall rectangular flaps cut from its center. The flaps spill onto the floor, opening windows onto the white wall on which the work hangs and revealing the bright red plaid pattern on the quilt’s reverse side. The other works on view were sculptural. Biggers glued pieces of antique patchwork quilts onto birch plywood with gilded edges, producing geometric compositions that variously recall origami, Rubik’s Cubes, and fractals. Most of these works hung on the wall, projecting out into space. One of them, Polyglot, is composed of a series of five cubic forms that rhyme with the bright, multicolored tumbling block patterning of the quilt segments adorning it. The transformation of the patterning into three dimensions produces an enigmatic structure that evokes something otherworldly, like an alien starship. Similarly, Semaphore, the only freestanding work in the exhibition, looks like a shuttle ready to lift off into space. More than five feet tall, the vertical structure comprises primarily triangular forms that jut from the work like fins. As Biggers has described, his quilt works, which he began making in 2012, allude to the—probably apocryphal—practice of using quilts to mark safe spaces along the Underground Railroad. Indeed, many of the works’ titles refer to forms of coded communication: semaphore is a system of visual signaling using flags, while ventriloquism is the act of disguising one’s voice by projecting it so it appears to come from a different source. Taking up the traditions of coding and patterning, Biggers functions as an interlocutor between past and present. Throughout the show, particularly in the sculptures, the artist demonstrated his interest in Afrofuturism, an aesthetic that imagines the future of Africa and the African diaspora by reassessing the past through science-fiction tropes. In the exhibition materials, he characterized Harriet Tubman as an “astronaut” who led slaves to freedom by “navigating the stars.” In contrast to the explicit symbolism that had yoked Laocoön to current events, the abstraction in the new works allows them to gesture to speculative futures. This article appears under the title “Sanford Biggers” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 90–91.
ArtNews℗Artist-Attorney Ragen Moss Treats Legal Language as a Sculptural Material℗Wendy Vogel℗ArtinAmerica℗24/01/2020℗℗Los Angeles–based artist Ragen Moss creates sci-fi-ish sculptures in which biomorphic forms made of clear polyethylene contain organlike objects and hang from metal armatures, suggesting cocoons or alien pods. She applies acrylic paint and handwritten text to the sculptures’ interior and exterior surfaces, playing with transparency and opacity and creating dialogues within and among the works. Her solo show at Bridget Donahue, “8 Animals,” comprised eight new sculptures (all 2019) suspended from metal hooks attached to the ceiling. Most of the polyethylene forms resembled torsos and housed heart-shaped vessels.While Moss’s sculptures resemble otherworldly creatures, she titles them after human archetypes. Some of the roles she refers to (leader, lender, borrower) have institutional functions, while others (puritan, hellcat, unteachable) are more amorphous. Her interest in social relationships was reinforced by her organization of the exhibition’s works into formal and conceptual couplings. The works in one such pair, Senior Borrower (with Mezzanine Borrower) and Senior Lender (with Mezzanine Lender, with Heart), both decorated with chevron patterns and a confetti-like spray of colored stars, hung across the room from each other, creating a call-and-response in the gallery.   In a statement accompanying the exhibition, Moss—who is a practicing lawyer in addition to being an artist—wrote that her work “ask[s] sculpture to productively press the linearity of language against the roundness of form,” and included a bullet-pointed list of notes for interpreting the show, their somewhat inscrutable quality echoed by the fragmentary texts incorporated into the sculptures themselves. Inside Senior Lender, which sports a Lamborghini logo on one side, are two hearts bearing written inscriptions: KICKER! and MANIPULATIVE DECEPTIVE DEVICE OR CONTRIVANCE. The latter phrase is borrowed from a part of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 that refers to insider-trading violations, but in this context evokes the frailty of bodies and the heart’s metaphorical dishonesty. The polyethylene surface of another work, Puritan (with hellcat Heart), features two sunken pits dotted with dark circles, resembling inverted breasts or eyeballs, and holds a red-painted heart that reads, FIRST QUALITY. On the work’s interior wall, Moss has copied a set of guidelines about butter grades from the California Food and Agricultural Code. The text’s placement within the suggestively corporeal sculpture calls attention to the bizarre, anthropomorphizing quality of the text—one sentence reads, “the body shall be fairly firm, but may show slight defects in texture”—and nods to the way legal language can distort the relationship between human and nonhuman entities.In recent years, a cadre of thinkers, notably the feminist theorist Donna Haraway, has mapped relationships between the zoological, the anthropological, and the technological. Moss’s quasi-mammalian objects offer an enticing formal analogue to these lines of thought. Her sculptures prompt reflection on dyads such as the conscious and unconscious body, parasite and host, parent and fetus. They also remind us of language’s role in shaping these dynamics—language that is not confined to science fiction, but that defines the laws that govern everyday phenomena, from financial transactions to agriculture.  This article appears under the title “Ragen Moss” in the February 2020 issue, p. 87.
ArtNews℗Daddy Issues: Mike Kelley’s Rebellion Against His Painterly Forefathers℗David Everitt Howe℗ArtinAmerica℗23/01/2020℗℗Hans Hofmann hung over this exhibition of Mike Kelley’s paintings like an oppressive father figure to rebel against. Epitomizing painting with a capital “P,” the early Abstract Expressionist’s work heavily impacted the curriculum taught at the University of Michigan when Kelley attended school there, in the 1970s. Kelley chafed at the formal, painterly, and, above all, academic version of art that his teachers espoused, calling his education “a form of mental abuse, of brainwashing.” He thus pursued mediums like performance, installation, and video, using them to plumb the dark psychological depths of good old-fashioned American culture. In the 1990s, however, he returned to painting with a body of work titled “Timeless Paintings,” in which he explored residual traumas from his education and sought to undermine the medium itself. The exhibition, which was organized by guest curator Jenelle Porter, revolved around this series and the various subseries it spawned.Kelley evoked Hofmann’s famous “push and pull” technique—in which planes of color appear to emerge and recede from the canvas—only to relegate it to gimmickry. The Prenatal Mutual Recognition of Betty and Barney Hill (1995) presents two Hofmann-like geometric planes of flat color as unmoored shapes that hover around ghoulish, washy renderings of the heads of a boy and a girl who appear awestruck, their mouths agape. The Hills were a couple who in 1961 claimed they had been abducted by aliens. Their story became the first widely publicized alien abduction account in American history. In citing both Hofmann and the Hills in his work, Kelley places the “high” culture of painting and the “low” of American pop culture cheek by jowl.A similar juxtaposition is found in works that turn the hilariously juvenile magazine Sex to Sexty—which, according to the exhibition materials, Kelley called the “bible of hick erotica”—into formal exercises in color, composition, and conceptual sign play. These works, from a series called “Missing Time Color Exercises,” are framed grids composed of copies of Sex to Sexty interspersed with monochrome panels that serve as stand-ins for issues Kelley was missing and that display paint hues the artist mixed to coordinate with the neighboring issues. In Missing Time Color Exercise #3 (1998), an issue titled Hippo Dippo and bearing a cover illustration depicting a lusty male hippopotamus at a zoo about to mount a female companion residing ass-up in a pool is placed beside a square of soothing, tasteful heather blue more appropriate to a spa or the walls of a decorative arts museum than the crass Sex to Sexty. Positioning the two in mismatched company, Kelley sets up a playful, heightened tension.While sex was everywhere in the show—note the two tip-touching boners in Lobed (2008–09)—certain works dealt with the notion of painting for painting’s sake. For instance, works from the 2003 “Carpets” series, composed of framed pieces of carpet imprinted with paint, served as a tongue-in-cheek takedown of Color Field abstraction, but one that was a little simplistic for my taste. More complicated and nuanced were Bouquet #2 (Green) and Bouquet #4 (Orange), both 1998, which are not the Matissean or Hofmann-like still lifes that the titles might suggest, but floor-based groupings of plastic cups of dried paint. They offer less a skewering of painting than its disassembly into constituent parts, presenting the sort of objects generally discarded after a painting is finished rather than the painting itself. Here, we see Kelley’s approach to the medium at its best, when it becomes not about the canvas at all, but about new and inventive ways to consider painting beyond the frame. This article appears under the title “Mike Kelley” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 83–84.
ArtNews℗Is Valie Export's 1980 Venice Biennale Installation Still Radical Today?℗Elizabeth Fullerton℗ArtinAmerica℗22/01/2020℗℗Austrian artist Valie Export is best known for provocative public performances that she described as a form of “expanded cinema,” in which she used her body to challenge the coding of female social roles and the sexual objectification of women. For her 1968 performance TAP and TOUCH Cinema, Export strapped a curtained box to her naked chest and invited members of the public to grope inside. In another work from that year, Action Pants: Genital Panic, she marched through a Munich art-house cinema in crotch-less pants, aggressively presenting her real genitalia as an alternative to the images of submissive femininity encountered on-screen. Like the mostly male Viennese Actionists, Export railed against the hypocrisy of conservative postwar Austrian culture, but the focus of her work was female oppression by society, state, and the Catholic Church.This show at Thaddaeus Ropac, which began representing the artist in 2017, restaged Export’s exhibition at the 1980 Venice Biennale, where she represented her homeland alongside the painter Maria Lassnig. The centerpiece was the bleakly powerful installation Geburtenbett (Birth Bed, 1980). In this work, a pair of open legs with two thin, red neon tubes extending from between them like trails of blood lies atop a rusty wedge-shaped metal “bed,” at the head of which rests a monitor showing a looped recording of the transubstantiation from a Catholic mass. Female corporeal suffering was also the subject of the video Remote, Remote (1973), in which Export sits in front of a large police photo of two sexually abused children, digging relentlessly at her cuticles with a knife before cleaning her fingers in a bowl of milk as if in penance for some crime.The bulk of the exhibition was devoted to large-scale prints of photographs from Export’s series “Körperkonfigurationen” (Body Configurations, 1972–76). Many of them show the artist’s body inserted into urban environments around Vienna or into nature: curved around the curb of a sidewalk, fused with the steps of Parliament, lying facedown in dirt. Thick graphic lines added to the surface of the prints heighten the sense of physical subjugation. Other photographs from the series feature Export in modern attire aping the poses of female subjects in historical artworks, often against white backgrounds. Die Geburtenmadonna (The Birth Madonna, 1976/80), modeled on a Michelangelo Pietà, shows the artist demurely cradling the air while perching legs akimbo on a washing machine, a red towel spewing from the door like a placenta. “I occupy myself with the pictorial representation of mental states, with the sensations of the body when it loses its identity, when the ego gnaws its way through the scraps of skin,” Export wrote in the 1980 exhibition catalogue.In the materials for the Ropac exhibition, the gallery framed Export’s Venice showing as a multimedia “Gesamtkunstwerk” that anticipated the direction of twenty-first-century feminist art. But while these works explore ideas that remain sharply resonant today, drawing attention to the ongoing struggle over abortion rights and the restrictions imposed on women by patriarchal power structures, they often seem dated and heavy-handed—particularly the photographs, which feel static and inert in comparison to Export’s radical performances and videos. Further, the exhibition’s framing of this body of work as a “trailblazing shift in conceptions of media and the possibilities of representation” glossed over the work of Export’s contemporaries, like Joan Jonas, Carolee Schneemann, Yoko Ono, and Ana Mendieta, who were pursuing similar cross-disciplinary experiments centered on the body. Export’s important contribution to feminist art most definitely merits examination. This particular show, however, felt like more of a historical artifact than a vital presentation of the artist’s practice.  This article appears under the title “Valie Export” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 94–95.
ArtNews℗Comic Artist Gary Panter’s Crude Drawings Riff on Dante, Punk, and Monster Movies℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗21/01/2020℗℗In Gary Panter’s drawings, a line is not the shortest path between two points, but a slow, wavering one, a termite’s crawl with endless detours and distractions. In the graphic novels, punk album art, band logos, and sketches he has produced between the 1970s and the present, this line is the constant. It intensifies his viewers’ gaze, forcing them to reexamine forms they thought they knew. In his epic graphic novel Jimbo in Purgatory (2004), whose titular character is a spiky-haired punk-everyman who appears throughout the artist’s work, the figures have limbs bulging in odd places and torsos scabrous with crosshatching. Even when Panter prints his own name it comes out mysterious, mute, primitive—you imagine the squeaks of his pen against the paper almost before you remember what the letters mean.One of the pleasures of “Gary Panter: Drawings, 1973–2019,” a recent exhibition at Fredericks & Freiser curated by Dan Nadel and Nicole Rudick, was the sense it gave of the range of Panter’s influences—the vast erudition hiding under what sometimes looks like plain old roughness. Born in 1950 and raised evangelical Christian in Sulphur Springs, Texas, Panter at an early age fell in love with Lewis Carroll’s Alice books, especially John Tenniel’s illustrations; he grew into a studious reader of Dante and Milton, two other chroniclers of the underworld. At least as crucial to his artistic development were the no-budget monster movies he watched on weekends: “the unreality of that really stuck with me,” he said of the genre, “theatricality and the possibility of the suspension of disbelief by crude means.”Crude means for Panter are less a millstone than a chance to prove his moxie—he’s like the action hero who tosses aside his gun and raises his fists. He favors rough paper and spindly pen nibs that bring out his hand’s unsteadiness instead of smoothing it over. When this gambit pays off, it pays handsomely. In Fog Pad (2019), details that might seem precious if you considered them individually (an armadillo with a hand for a head, for example, or a hippie van full of similarly creepy critters) accumulate heft over the course of the page, giving the sense of muscular, Miltonian exertion. The same kind of anecdotal style turns out less successfully in Born Wild (2012)—there isn’t enough going on to keep the eye fluttering over the paper, and the two figures at the center are too stiff and blandly rendered to command attention on their own.Half-emptying your tool kit and using what’s left with twice the energy isn’t a bad way of characterizing the punk movement (think of Sid Vicious digging into the bass he refused to tune). Panter has been tied to punk for most of his career, and could be called punk’s definitive visual interpreter. He was deep in the Los Angeles underground scene in the 1970s and designed album art for the Plugz, and even in the 1990s, after he’d won three Emmys for codesigning the sets for “Pee Wee’s Playhouse,” he went on casting Jimbo in his comics. He has insisted, “I was never the one in the mosh pit,” though some distance may have been needed to capture the punk movement on paper.The result of this distance, of being intimately acquainted with the movement but somehow not quite of it, are images that elaborate on punk’s spirit with unexpected riffs and links and lineages. In 1979, Panter drew Elvis Zombie; five years later he published a graphic novel called Invasion of the Elvis Zombies. Both are pretty much what they sound like. In the earlier drawing, the King—two years dead—sports ragged black robes and a big hairdo. His white eyes still glow with worldly hungers. “He was a powerful psychic force,” Panter said, “a sexualized psychic force.” At a time when punk tended to interpret Elvis as a cautionary tale or an object of derision, Panter saw a proto-punk, a timeless icon, a familiar form that needed to be drawn anew. This article appears under the title “Gary Panter” in the February 2020 issue, p. 84.
ArtNews℗Félix Vallotton and the Dark Heart of the Nineteenth-Century Bourgeoisie℗Chase Madar℗ArtinAmerica℗20/01/2020℗℗The bourgeoisie: now there’s a subject for a nineteenth-century artist. In little more than a century, this newish class had gone from being comedic fast-talking Figaros to planet-altering overlords striding across the globe in search of a soul, status, and an appropriate self-image. What, aside from double-entry bookkeeping, lurked in the heart of the bourgeoisie, and how to represent its likeness? Enter Félix Vallotton, striver son in a Swiss bourgeois family who came to Paris in 1882 and enrolled at the Académie Julian, a freewheeling alternative to the École des Beaux-Arts. He soon fell in with the Nabis (Hebrew for “prophets”), a group united in their esteem for Gauguin and Cézanne that included Bonnard and Vuillard. They preached spiritual renewal and, more productively, a jettisoning of the canvas’s illusionistic space in favor of stylization, lurid color, and an overt use of ornament. Bonnard and Vuillard took this approach indoors, turning bourgeois interiors into hallucinatory scenes.As demonstrated by the paintings in the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s retrospective of Vallotton’s work, “Painter of Disquiet,” the artist was a fine colorist, on par with his better-known peers. Yet his signature contributions to modern art eschewed the riotous chromatic wallpaper of Bonnard and Vuillard—and even color in general. The artist’s great achievement was to revive woodcut printing in Europe. If it hadn’t been Vallotton, someone else would have done it, with half of Paris high on ukiyo-e woodcuts ever since Japan had been forcibly opened for commerce in the 1850s. But we’re lucky it was Vallotton, whose stark black-and-white prints, produced using matrices of soft pearwood, provide a singularly critical look at both private and public life. Few artists have made the dark heart of the bourgeoisie more visually interesting, and none with such perfect economy of means. Vallotton cast his gaze into private apartments, where the clocks seemed stuck in le cinq à sept, adulterous witching hours. His greatest single work is the woodcut series “Intimités” (Intimacies, 1897–98), published in La Revue blanche, the flagship little magazine of Parisian decadence. The standout print is L’Argent (Money, 1898), whose leftmost edge displays a louche canoodling couple, while the right two-thirds of the composition is an immaculate expanse of thick, fudgy noir. The exhibition includes a few of Vallotton’s preparatory gray-shaded ink-wash sketches alongside the prints, showing how much he gained by losing tonal value gradations in favor of flat white and black—especially the black whose vast joined allotments suggest so much obscured detail, much of it no doubt illicit. Within these self-imposed limits Vallotton produced an astonishing variety of atmospheric effects, from fireside heat and light to greenhouse humidity in one 1896 series on domestic music-making.Equally striking are Vallotton’s crowdscapes and city scenes—an execution, a traffic accident, a sudden downpour, faces in a darkened theater—which, like Weegee’s snapshots of working-class urban life, brim as much with eerie weirdness as with conscientious reportage, the teeming people showing more mask than face. These graphic works were immensely popular, not just in Paris’s thriving radical print media but in the Anglosphere from London to Chicago, where a couple of Harvard guys ran the Francophile magazine The Chap-Book, which published Mallarmé poems even before its Parisian counterparts. Vallotton’s woodcuts are reproduced in the New York Review of Books today, proof of both the abiding freshness of his designs and the enduring appeal of fin-de-siècle Paris as a mythical homeland for intellectuals. Vallotton’s graphic works anticipated the incriminating tenebrism of cinematographers like John Alton and Gabriel Figueroa, who lensed the world and its surfaces, from velvety divans to hard asphalt, as one big crime scene. This depiction of outwardly respectable bourgeoisie as secretly scandalous rewarded all parties, throwing a bone to socialists and moralists while tickling the self-regard of a social class long anxious about being too staid, too dull. And the nineteenth-century bourgeoisie, it turned out, had a healthy appetite for introspection and self-criticism. (Ibsen did not starve.)Vallotton’s radicalism almost made it to the end of the century. In 1899 he married a wealthy widow, Gabrielle Rodrigues-Henriques, a move that was good for business—her family connections guaranteed him steady gallery representation—and that provided a free source of domestic alienation for his art. That same year, he painted Le Dîner, effet de lamp (Dinner by Lamplight), a dinner table nightmare in which his new stepdaughter stares out at him from Stygian darkness while his stepson yawns. His Intérieur avec femme en rouge de dos (Interior with Woman in Red Seen from Behind, 1903), a view through three doorways in a bourgeois dwelling, with a woman in a nightgown standing in the middle of the scene, conveys emptiness and a sense of the uncanny amid quietly sober brushwork, a mood later distilled to higher proof by Magritte.Vallotton did make more than bourgeoisie genre scenes. He painted nudes, whose generally frigid and listless flesh prefigured Weimar Germany’s Neue Sachlichkeit. More appealing are his paysages composés, shimmery coastal and riverine landscapes synthesized in the studio from sketches and snaps from the artist’s beloved Kodak; the technique was a retreat from the plein-air honesty of the Impressionists and, despite the daring Japanese-inflected formalism of his waves and moonrises, a throwback to more traditional landscape works, with their heavy cargo of symbol and portent.Vallotton grew old enough to glower at the next wave of ambitious avant-gardists rolling into Paris. Picasso made his great portrait of Gertrude Stein resembling a neo-primitive terra-cotta vessel in 1906, and the following year, the Swiss artist painted her as a direct descendent of Ingres’s iconic bourgeois M. Bertin, with the same mass, cold dignity, and restless, sausage-y digits. The Met, in a curatorial coup, hung the two Gertrudes side by side in uneasy company. It must be said, though, that Picasso’s modernist portrait is not much touched by Vallotton’s traditionalist retort. After European leaders started their Great War, Vallotton, like other formerly radical painters, ranging from George Bellows to Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, caught war fever, hiring himself out to his adopted homeland to make prints depicting the Western Front, unedifying little images lacking bite and aesthetic charge. It is a mercy that the Met’s presentation does not include these woodcuts, which were featured in the show’s first incarnation, at the Royal Academy in London. Vallotton died in 1925, leaving behind an exemplary body of work. Unlike Bonnard, he never got his own volume in the Thames & Hudson “World of Art” series, his painterly talent too various, his output irreducible to a single stylistic brand. (Vallotton also wrote plays and novels. His posthumously published, campily doom-laden novel La Vie meurtrière [The Murderous Life] is still in print.) One can easily imagine the Calvinist elders of Vallotton’s native Lausanne looking with approval at his moralizing, his eventual complaisance, and the stark astringency of his images.  This article appears under the title “Félix Vallotton” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 81–83.
ArtNews℗Jennifer and Kevin McCoy Explore the Gulf Between Working at a Hip Office and Cleaning It℗Emily Watlington℗ArtinAmerica℗17/01/2020℗℗Jennifer and Kevin McCoy’s latest show at Postmasters centered on a new fictional video titled Cleaner—the second in their “Workstations” trilogy, which began with Broker (2016)—that explores how stark the disjuncture between blue- and white-collar labor has become. The protagonist is a Polish woman employed as a cleaner at a hip office (the video was shot at the Brooklyn headquarters of Kickstarter, where the McCoys were artists-in-residence in 2018), and her movements contrast with the zombielike stillness of the office workers. She judges their weird health food in her inner monologue, which we hear throughout the video in voice-over, and enjoys the fact that they don’t notice her. While contorting her body to clean a tall window, her monologue switches from Polish to English: “I’m not here. This isn’t happening,” she repeats. She becomes increasingly bold in her work routine, erasing a whiteboard drawing in spite of the directive not to do so written in large letters. The drawing suggests a sort of cartoon diagram of the company’s plans to dominate the universe. Arrows connect various components: terms like BLUECHIP and SUCCESS, logos for companies like Seamless and Uber, a rocket sporting the branding of Facebook, Amazon, and Google and bearing a giant poop emoji in place of its engine. The lifestyle represented by this office culture is completely alien to the cleaner. She asks herself why the company has so many workers and why they all have the same computers. The office workers appear to dissociate from their surroundings, hypnotized by their screens, not even noticing when the cleaner, who is played by a professional dancer, starts to incorporate elaborate modern-dance-style choreography into her maintenance routine. She elegantly rolls across their desks, collecting crumpled papers along the way. She propels herself toward her mop with grand battements and carries out interpretive movements on a conference table instead of cleaning it.Soon enough, she has other people to dance with. At night, after the nine-to-fivers have left, she puts tape on the security camera lenses and throws a party, charging a cover. Exploiting the invisibility of her labor and using her intimate knowledge of the building, she makes some extra cash and has some fun, even if—unable to leave her maintenance work fully behind—she has to clean up after her guests, picking up food they drop or doing damage control when they get belligerent.The cleaner’s movements in her day job don’t seem intended to convey the physical demands placed on her body. Instead, they come across as beautiful gestures representing a physical freedom that stands in contrast to the sedentariness of the office workers. This glamorization of manual labor was enhanced by her uniform—a trendy-looking version of a boilersuit—and by the ten tin casts of liquid spills that gorgeously cascaded across the gallery floor. By most people’s standards, cleaning other people’s messes is not a fun exercise or an aesthetic expression, and the McCoys’ presentation of such work glosses over serious concerns involving the exploitation of blue-collar bodies. Even so, Cleaner successfully highlights the absurdity of our division of labor today—when some of us use our bodies too much, and others only enough to strain our eyes and carpal ligaments.This article appears under the title “Jennifer and Kevin McCoy” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 87–88.
ArtNews℗Photographer David Gilbert's Tableaux Give Studio Detritus an Air of Drama and Glamour℗Matt Sussman℗ArtinAmerica℗16/01/2020℗℗David Gilbert’s photographs depict arrangements he creates in his studio out of whatever happens to be on hand: scrap paper, found detritus, fabric, string, cardboard, and organic matter like branches and flowers. Photographed in soft natural light, his everyday materials take on a heft and drama they might lack if encountered in person. Like vacant theatrical sets, his compositions are self-contained worlds that hint at possible occupants: if we stare long enough, it seems, something just might happen. The eight photographs in Gilbert’s exhibition “Painted Ladies” (all 2019) play fast and loose with art historical precedent, much like the glamorous architectural anachronisms evoked by the show’s title: San Francisco’s famous Victorian houses, whose brightly painted facades are fanciful 1960s reinterpretations of a nineteenth-century style. Gilbert took the photographs during a residency at Yaddo, where he had to work with a fixed repertoire of props, maximizing limited resources. Certain elements, like a piece of butcher paper painted with black stripes and a veil’s length of gauze, are ripped up and repurposed across multiple arrangements, the modest components used to create effects suggestive of both neoclassical portrait sittings and plein air painting. Like a drag queen fashioning a gown out of trash, Gilbert proves glamour is not so much about what you have as what you do with it. A particularly striking trio of works features compositions that center on hanging forms: in Painted Lady, a length of white gauze dappled in paint is suspended from a bunched ball of reddish paper, the ghostly results uneasily recalling both a bride with her back turned and a freshly slaughtered chicken. By contrast, the roll of green-painted burlap with a slender piece of gauze hanging over it in Grande Dame forms an elegant silhouette recalling the couture worn by midcentury model Lisa Fonssagrives in photographs shot by her husband, Irving Penn. In Posy, a large silhouette of a flower cut out of butcher paper curls around itself like a sleeping bat.Not all of the photographs feature such suggestive figural elements. Gilbert’s sumptuous handling of light is best appreciated in the more abstract works, which propose a middle ground between still life arrangements and landscapes. In Ether, for example, a swath of light-blue fabric hangs before a piece of white fabric beyond which we can make out the outlines of a window. As if nodding to the view obscured by his arrangement, Gilbert has inserted a printed reproduction of a cloud painting by John Constable next to his own roughly executed copy of the same work. Constable printouts are also visible in several other photographs, including Posy, where one is tacked onto a painted backdrop that seems inspired by it, with wispy strokes of pale blue on a wrinkled white ground. Instead of a sly wink from copy to original, Gilbert’s juxtaposition of the Constable reproductions with his own clumsy homages suggests that both versions have aesthetic value, contributing equally to the composition as a whole. What matters is the total look. Constable once claimed to have never seen an ugly thing in his life, explaining that “light, shade, perspective” will always make the form of an object beautiful. Gilbert’s photographs seem to take Constable’s quip as a challenge, capturing, with great tenderness and care, the potential of even the humblest of materials to enchant, while revealing and reveling in the manufactured nature of such beauty. This article appears under the title “David Gilbert” in the February 2020 issue, p. 93.
ArtNews℗Hugh Scott-Douglas’s "Trade Winds" Paintings and the Vagaries of Art’s Financialization℗Rachel Wetzler℗ArtinAmerica℗15/01/2020℗℗Is it ironic, or simply appropriate, that Hugh Scott-Douglas, an artist whose work has often taken up the flows of twenty-first-century capital as its theme, is the poster child for the vagaries of art’s financialization? In 2014, dealer Niels Kantor paid $100,000 for one of Scott-Douglas’s “Cyanotype” paintings—hazy blue-and-white grids made by exposing film printed with algorithmically generated patterns onto canvas—intending to flip the twentysomething artist’s work for a quick profit. But it turned out the market for Scott-Douglas and his ilk, whose riffs on the tradition of modernist abstraction with cerebral and/or gimmicky process-based twists were assigned the fatally catchy moniker “zombie formalism” by the critic Walter Robinson, had already started to cool. Two years later, having desperately attempted and failed to recoup his investment—he even tried to hawk the painting on eBay—Kantor gave a scorched-earth interview to Bloomberg News in which he compared the artist to “a stock that crashed.” Normally, I’d consider it a little unseemly to begin a review by dwelling on the gory details of an artist’s sales history. But walking through “Spare the Wrench” at Casey Kaplan—Scott-Douglas’s seventeenth commercial solo show since receiving his BFA in 2010—I couldn’t shake the sense that the body of work on view seemed at once too self-aware about its own status as a commodity and not enough. The eight untitled canvases (all 2019) are the newest iteration of Scott-Douglas’s series “Trade Winds,” begun in 2016, for which he digitally edits screenshots displaying the shipping industry software FleetMon, which tracks commercial sea routes, to isolate the “graphemes” representing wind, current, and wave conditions. The results, printed on canvas, are inscrutable maps made up of dense, patterned layers of arrows and triangles.In these new works, the process has become more byzantine, but not to significantly different ends: instead of printing the digital images directly, as in the earlier “Trade Winds” works, Scott-Douglas beamed them to a television monitor and scanned its screen as an intermediary step, after which, according to the exhibition materials, “visual effects that can be achieved through Photoshop [were] pursued manually.” In other words, the artist made his hand conspicuous by manipulating the printed canvas. He selectively abraded the images, added messy layers of resin and enamel, and pulled lengths of avian netting over the surfaces to produce an effect that recalls the warped grids of map projections. The works have an air of calculated imperfection, like artfully ripped designer denim. The exhibition’s title alludes to “monkeywrenching,” a term used by eco-activists to refer to the strategic sabotage of environmentally destructive entities (for instance, cutting commercial fishing nets, or “spiking” trees with large nails that damage logging equipment). But Scott-Douglas’s version of monkeywrenching is formal, not political. We are told that the paintings take images produced in the service of logistical efficiency and render them illegible, as a means of symbolically intervening in the circulation of goods and services. But what these works actually do is treat data as decoration: they look like information without conveying any. Swap out ships for trucks, or foot traffic at an Amazon distribution center, or US Postal Service routes, or ski runs in Aspen and little would change except the press release. In the end, it doesn’t matter. As Scott-Douglas surely knows, his pictorial wrench in the system doesn’t disrupt anything at all. Nor, I suspect, is it really meant to. This article appears under the title “Hugh Scott-Douglas” in the February 2020 issue, p. 86.
ArtNews℗Paul P.'s Ghostly Portraits Link Vintage Porn to Art Historical Tradition℗Gaby Cepeda℗ArtinAmerica℗14/01/2020℗℗Paul P.’s exhibition at Lulu was his first solo show in Mexico—and his first devoted primarily to portraiture in over a decade. Though the Paris-based Canadian artist is best known for his paintings of lissome young men, he has explored a wider set of interests in recent years, producing abstract paintings composed of soft-edged color blocks, and sculptures and installations that openly flirt with interior design. For the untitled watercolors in this show—most of them closely cropped portraits made between 2017 and 2019—P. returned to a familiar source: gay porn magazines of the 1960s and ’70s from the Canadian Lesbian and Gay Archives in Toronto, which he first began incorporating into his work in the early 2000s. As the artist described in a 2008 interview, he digs through the archives looking for “a body or a face that has, in its pose or expression, something that transcends its sexual context.” He then resituates this material in works charged with centuries of art historical tradition.At the exhibition’s entrance hung three paintings depicting figures who refuse to meet the viewer’s gaze: a supine man with closed eyes bathed in a wash of bright colors; a short-haired boy with downcast eyes emerging from dark blue shadows; and a young man with his head turned, his wavy brown hair curling away from his smooth, pale nape. These works contrasted with a more confrontational portrait displayed across the room, whose subject stares at the viewer from under a dark unibrow, posing like a youthful outlaw, his chin down and a cigarette dangling from his lips. Hung in the gallery’s second room was a painting in which another ephebic young man looks out through side-swept, floppy hair—like Justin Bieber’s, or Robert Redford’s in the ’70s—with shadowy eyes and a pink, parted mouth. The image reveals little of his body except for an exposed nipple and a hand grazing his cheek, but conveys a sense of lively desire offset by the ashen quality of his skin.P. often cites nineteenth-century portraitists like James McNeill Whistler, John Singer Sargent, and Thomas Eakins as among his most prized influences. By linking his work to their practices, which are typically associated with portrayals of high society, P. projects his vintage-porn source material into the firmament of classical beauty. But there is also something ominous about these paintings: P., who was born in the late 1970s, has described the period represented by the magazines as an era of gay liberation narrowly missed by members of his own generation, the first for which sex was literally connected to death. The faces in these watercolors have a diaphanous, ephemeral quality that makes them seem almost ghostly. Like ghosts, they hint at origin stories that are never fully disclosed and that viewers must intuit from traces.This article appears under the title “Paul P.” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 93–94.
ArtNews℗Suzanne McClelland’s “Mute” Paintings Demonstrate a Provocative Silence in an Era of Noise℗Faye Hirsch℗ArtinAmerica℗13/01/2020℗℗After thirty years of exhibiting her work, language has failed Suzanne McClelland. Or, more accurately, she has failed language, having banished text from her latest series of paintings, “Mute” (2019), the subject of her most recent show. Those who have followed McClelland’s career are used to literally reading her abstractions; in them, she has wielded bits of text, ranging from innocuous prepositions to conversational fragments to absurd ciphers and even obscenities, as composition-building gestures. Here, by contrast, text exists only in the titles, each a letter of the alphabet. From the bottoms of the twenty-six same-size canvases, monolithic forms that vaguely suggest heads, creatures, outcroppings, or shambling silhouettes rise against mainly monochromatic grounds. Made by applying dry and wet oil pigments, mica, sand, and glitter to canvases laid flat, and then tilting the canvases so that the medium flowed, these forms have dense, viscous, cracked surfaces that sparkle in the light. Up close, you can see many colors buried in the thick flows, though the paintings wear their chroma subtly. Spaced evenly on the walls of the main gallery, the works felt like sentinels, each with a distinct personality and a quality of interior life.Mute O features one of the headlike forms: in this case, a glowering black mound with four eyes and an angry little yellow mouth that looks as though it is blowing two smoke rings, one a tiny orange dot and the other a purple circlet. Pink glitter in one white eye adds to the angry feeling, but a cartoonish purple strand curling up from the form into delicate yellow and orange washes lends humor. There is more than a whiff of Guston’s late mordancy in these paintings—in Mute Q, for example, a “head” bounded by a narrow white band to separate it from a sickly pea-green ground lies on its side, with an ear-ish detail at the top. A number of works register as geological, due not only to their grainy materials but also to their compositions. Mute P has a volcanic feeling: an ochre-colored triangular formation pressed with gold glitter opens slightly at the top to offer a glimpse of molten cobalt, pink, and purple, while a smattering of black circles tumbles down the front, as if an eruption has occurred. Mute I is a promontory; Mute K, a geode, its surface gritty and its center splitting open to reveal hot pink within. The glittering black-and-silver form in Mute V resembles a silhouetted figure that has turned its back to exit; thick white paint at the left spreads awkwardly across bumps of material, suggesting a bedsheet laid over items left on the bed. Consistently, the paintings seem to hide a smoldering intensity beneath lapidary surfaces. McClelland has always addressed political and feminist content through her chosen idiom of abstraction, and these latest works are no exception. Indeed, “Mute” may be her most trenchant social critique to date. Her decision to create wordless paintings in this phase of her career, as she mentioned in a conversation with me, has much to do with a sense that language has become increasingly futile in an era of volubility and failed communication. In this series, she shows the power in refusing to add another voice to the din. This article appears under the title “Suzanne McClelland” in the February 2020 issue, pp. 85–86.
ArtNews℗An Exhibition of Native Painting Fills a Stubborn Gap in the History of Modernism℗Christopher Green℗ArtinAmerica℗10/01/2020℗℗Dick West’s Spatial Whorl (1949–50), a small oil on canvas with a swirl of earthy browns and yellows punctuated by hot pinks, sky blues, and sharp red spines, is the first painting visitors see at “Stretching the Canvas: Eight Decades of Native Painting,” a new long-term exhibition at the New York branch of the Smithsonian’s National Museum of the American Indian, featuring works from the institution’s collection. “What is American Indian about this graceful abstraction?” a label asks. The question is a trap for the essentialist viewer who would give any answer other than, “It was painted by an American Indian artist.” One could say that the elongated orange-and-red arrows seem to evoke quillwork, or that the central yellow disc suggests the Sun Dance ceremony that West depicted in other paintings—but only by cherry-picking details from the many fluid elements of the composition.“Stretching the Canvas” does not aim to offer a comprehensive survey or conclusive definition of American Indian painting. Rather, it advocates for the many ways that Native artists have maneuvered around systems of art’s production and reception that would deny them a “right to individualism,” as the Yanktonai Dakota artist Oscar Howe wrote in a 1958 letter protesting the rejection of his work from a competition for not being “Indian” enough. The thirty-nine paintings by thirty artists at NMAI prove too multifarious for any single idea of a “Native style.” Instead this celebration of the museum’s painting collection demonstrates how a history of heterogeneity counters essentialist rhetoric. Tracing the many lines of Native modernism, the show should be a bellwether for the institutions that still exclude these stories.Spatial Whorl was one of six abstractions painted by West, a Southern Cheyenne artist, for his MFA thesis at the University of Oklahoma. It seems to refute the figurative dance and ceremonial scenes for which he is best known. One such painting from 1940–60, depicting a male dancer, hangs in the narrow adjacent gallery labeled Training Grounds, one of five thematic sections in the show. The works included therein highlight how art programs at Bacone College in Muskogee, Oklahoma, and the Studio program at the Santa Fe Indian School (later replaced by the Institute of American Indian Arts, or IAIA) educated a generation of pre-war Native students in the flat, illustrative manner that became known as the Studio Style. While adherence to this style and “traditional” subject matter was a myopic dogma for many artists, it was nonetheless a revolutionary act of modern expression in the face of stereotypical expectations for Native art, which was often not considered fine art at all. The Shálako People (1930), a watercolor by Hopi Pueblo painter Fred Kabotie, is an exquisite example from this period depicting costumed dancers in a Zuni winter ceremony. Their complex geometric headdresses and orange-and-white feathered robes stand flat against a neutral background, alienated from space in a distinctly modernist way.“Grand Ambitions,” the opening double-winged section, presents Native painters of various periods at the cutting edge of both political and formal conversations. In Jaune Quick-to-See Smith’s Trade Canoe, Adrift (2015), a birch-bark canoe bursts from a yellow sky and red water, brimming with Syrian refugees, masks, and fish. The work links worldwide migrant crises with struggles for federal recognition of Indigenous land rights. Fifty years earlier, Fritz Scholder’s Indian and Rhinoceros (1968) similarly took on federal controls by depicting the Bureau of Indian Affairs as the eponymous pachyderm against a royal purple field, its back turned on a Native man casting a dubious eye over his shoulder. Ironically, Scholder’s painting went on tour throughout Europe with the US Information Agency in the 1970s as an agent of Cold War cultural diplomacy.Landscape is a recurring theme. Some artists indicate their relationships to ancestral territories and heritage through figuration, while others suggest them in abstract compositions, such as the squeezed and stratified mountain ranges that emerge in James Lavadour’s Blanket (2005). Native artists paint not only their ancestral lands but their adopted homes, too; as with artists of all backgrounds, many of them have chosen to live in New York. With the snaking acrylic and charcoal coils of Brooklyn (2004), Pascua Yaqui painter Mario Martinez pays homage to the borough where he lives. Turquoise, ochre, and black markings evoke subway lines and topographic elements. Martinez calls such works of his “Yaquiscapes,” as they employ color schemes redolent of his Southwest origins. It hangs next to the newly acquired White Environ #5 (1967) by George Morrison, an exemplary white monochrome in the signature horizon line style of the Grand Portage Chippewa painter, who studied at the Art Students League in the 1940s and was active in Abstract Expressionist circles.Though Morrison disavowed the reading of “Indian themes” and identity in his paintings, he would come later in life to admit the extent to which his abstractions were inspired by the light and rocky shores of his Lake Superior home territory. Artists coming of age in the 1960s and ’70s were increasingly concerned with the formal nature of painting as they struggled for inclusion in “mainstream” centers like New York, yet tended to be less coy about their sources of inspiration. The section Cosmopolitans offers a tight look at such painters, who often chose to avoid figurative depictions of Indigenous subjects in favor of abstraction, expressionism, and symbolism. The venerable Kay WalkingStick (Cherokee) and recently deceased Frank LaPeña (Nomtipom Wintu) combine geometric abstractions with expressionistic color and brushy treatments evoking Native content; WalkingStick’s parfleche-like composition Homage to Chief Joseph (Chief Joseph #1), 1975, is titled after the Nez Perce leader, and the nail-studded inner red circle of LaPeña’s casein-on-Masonite Foot Steps (1968) simultaneously evokes a Plains medicine shield, the sacred circle, and Constructivist geometries. Standing Water (2002), a relatively small-scale painting by Emmi Whitehorse (Navajo), likewise hums with biotic swirls and stratigraphic marks over layered fields of color.The sections Reclaiming the Abstract and Indian Pop further build out the foundational history of Native painting, with sections dedicated to artists who rejected Studio Style figuration in favor of abstractions inspired by historic Indigenous designs translated from pottery, textiles, and basketry, as well as experiments in Pop art that emerged from the IAIA. Dance Break (1982) by Harry Fonseca, a Maidu/Native Hawaiian artist, irreverently depicts Pueblo sacred clowns in the guise of the trickster figure Coyote, eating cotton candy and smoking cigarettes— a far cry from Kabotie’s ceremonious figures. Fonseca’s pink resonates with the rosy sunset reflected on the adobe roofs of a village in Pueblo at Dusk (1987) by Dan Namingha (Hopi-Tewa). Fonseca studied with LaPeña, and Namingha attended the IAIA in the sixties when Scholder taught there. Scholder’s The American Indian (1970) closes the exhibition with the depiction of an Indigenous man wrapped in an American flag, painted during the height of the American Indian Movement’s agitations for civil rights. Grimacing and dignified, the figure is a contradictory archetype for an American history of Native painting in the post-war period.There are some regrettable omissions due to conflicting exhibition schedules; an Oscar Howe exhibition is forthcoming and a masterful touring T.C. Cannon retrospective recently closed. The curators also chose to exclude art from entire portions of the continent—notably the Northwest Coast—despite ample examples in the collection. Nonetheless, “Stretching the Canvas” is a remedial lesson in the multiple strands of modernist painting that are still missing from many museums. Anyone seeking such rich visual histories absent from the newly expanded Museum of Modern Art uptown, which has not included a single work by a Native American artist in an otherwise globally inclusive rehang, would be best advised to find them at the Smithsonian outpost on Bowling Green.
ArtNews℗Juan Roberto Diago's Paintings Challenge the Myth of Racial Equality in Cuba℗Gean Moreno℗ArtinAmerica℗09/01/2020℗℗Juan Roberto Diago is part of a new Afro-Cuban cultural movement that seeks to center questions of race and the afterlives of slavery in Cuban discourse. Although his practice has touched on installation and photography, Diago primarily makes paintings that marry abstract form, discarded materials, and African religious references. “Diago: The Pasts of this Afro-Cuban Present” is his first comprehensive survey in the United States. In order to convey the social context in which Diago’s practice has developed, curator Alejandro de la Fuente—a historian at Harvard University, where the exhibition premiered—includes quotes from him on the walls, alongside the works. The quotes are direct and denunciatory: they aim to disabuse viewers of any romantic notions they may hold regarding racial equality in Cuba. There is an unresolved tension, however, between their forceful language and Diago’s often formally well-behaved paintings.El Hombre Azul (The Blue Man, 2009) depicts, from the shoulders up, a style of abstract, generic figure that, serving an archetypal function, recurs in Diago’s paintings. A seam runs vertically down the example in El Hombre Azul, reading as a stitched laceration—a metaphor for the bodily and psychic wounding that black people have experienced since they arrived in the New World. The same type of figure appears in Rostro Sin Nombre (Nameless Face, 2019), but here is rendered on a quilt of small squares of canvas with frayed edges. The geometric background forces the painting’s figural and gestural elements into refined mosaic designs.The works that fare best in the show’s exchange between combative language and graceful artifacts are those that use the metaphor of the pictorial surface as skin. In Aché Pa’ los Míos (Blessings for My Friends, 1999), a web of white cotton and burlap scraps protrudes like a tangle of scar tissue from the roughly treated—torn in places—burlap ground, heightening our awareness of the painting’s materiality. We are led to consider the historical echoes—“the pasts of this Afro-Cuban present”—that reverberate in the painting and to consider the role of burlap and cotton in plantation economies and their afterlives.In “Variaciones de Oggun” (Oggun’s Variations, 2013), a series of assemblage-paintings whose name refers to the god of metals and war in a number of Afro-Caribbean religions, Diago welds together pieces of steel from fifty-five-gallon drums to produce gallant geometric compositions. Although he intends the “poor” material to allude to precarious living conditions, to shantytowns and informal economies, it is only the works’ suturing marks—which read as keloid scars—that interfere with a purely formal reading. These largely elegant paintings, sticking close to human scale, are unable to generate a sense of physical discomfort that could match the conceptual heft of their subject matter.El Poder no se Regala se Lucha (Power Is Not Given but Conquered, 2009), which depicts a bowl or cooking pot floating between the words of the title, consists of thirty small panels. The corners of the panels have been removed to reveal stretcher bars in the form of hand-carved dowels. The artist has discussed the role of the tourist industry in Cuba, which exploded after the fall of the Berlin Wall. These dowels resemble kitschy materials found in tourist traps, such as the caning seen in tiki bars and on chairs in faux-traditional restaurants. The rise of the tourist industry—which favors people with certain phenotypes and skin tones for jobs and other opportunities—reactivated racializing and discriminatory behaviors that had supposedly vanished with the revolutionary process, and enlarged economic disparity along the color line. When Diago’s paintings break the traditional structure of the medium, they assume in a subtle but piercing way the explosive candor of his discourse and its desire to rip through the language and fantastical declarations with which race is treated (or not treated) in Cuba. This article appears under the title “Juan Roberto Diago” in the January 2020 issue, p. 83.
ArtNews℗Ed Atkins's New Work Shows that His Real Medium Might Be Poetry℗Emily Watlington℗ArtinAmerica℗08/01/2020℗℗After seeing some gripping performative poetry readings by Ed Atkins, I walked into “I like spit now,” his latest exhibition at Gavin Brown’s enterprise, hoping to see something other than the CGI works for which he is best known. While Atkins’s videos play with the dissonance between the very human scenes they depict and their hyperreal computerized rendering, their most striking elements are the monologues he crafts for his melancholy computer-generated male protagonists. Most art that employs cutting-edge technology is ultimately about the medium alone, leaving little behind when that medium inevitably becomes obsolete. But strip away the CGI from Atkins’s works and we’re still left with poetry—which might, in fact, be Atkins’s real medium.I was surprised to find my wish come true, to a degree. CGI did feature prominently in the exhibition, which was spread across three floors of the gallery’s Harlem building, but the show also foregrounded writing in ways I hadn’t imagined, presenting fragments of text by Atkins and others using unexpected mediums. The exhibition opened with works from his new series “Refuse” (2019), including laser-cut engravings of text—a poem, a recipe, and an index—on giant nonperishable crackers that hung on the walls, interspersed among cartoonish gouache drawings of hands and feet. On the gallery’s top floor was another group of works from the series: stained tablecloths, mounted on foam panels, that had been embroidered with nursery rhymes, a poem by the tenth-century Japanese writer Sei Shōnagon, a list by Isaac Newton of all his sins, and a list of baby names Atkins drafted before the birth of his daughter.The centerpiece of the series is a new CGI video, Refuse, whose two channels were divided between floors. On the gallery’s top floor, a tall vertical projection displayed a generative simulation of various objects—among them, tires, a ladder, a piano, and flat-screen TVs—dropping from the sky amid falling rain and snow. On the ground floor, the other projection displayed the same objects crashing to the ground, forming a growing pile of snow-covered trash. The work employs AI that makes the objects fall differently each time the video loops. CGI is typically used to produce fantastical scenes, like singing snowmen, that defy the limiting, depressing, and banal aspects of reality. Here, by contrast, it is harnessed to explore more realistic hypotheses, such as those examined in crash-test simulations, which translate principles of physics from equations to observable scenarios.On the second floor, sandwiched between the two parts of Refuse, was Atkins’s installation Old Food (2017–19), comprising a rack of suits at the center of the room, draped in plastic as if at a dry cleaner’s, surrounded by nine synchronized CGI videos featuring enigmatic renderings of crying male figures, piano players, and grotesque food. None of the characters speak. Instead, sheets of plywood and metal engraved with dry, didactic interpretations of Atkins’s work written by the anonymous bloggers on the website Contemporary Art Writing Daily accompany the videos.The omnipresence of screens today tends to produce experiences of dissociation, in which the hypnotic allure of bright computer monitors or game consoles overrides our physical needs—for rest, for food. But Atkins likes spit now: slobbery stains on tablecloths, the stuff you might notice in your mouth while reading his poems on crackers or watching his seductive video of the elements of a burger slowly falling on top of each other. While Atkins has long probed if and how human bodily needs and emotions figure in the digital sphere, this exhibition saw him pushing his work more emphatically into meatspace. This article appears under the title “Ed Atkins” in the January 2020 issue, pp. 79–80.
ArtNews℗Agnes Denes’s Idealistic Projects Refuse to Accept Apocalypse as Inevitable℗Walker Downey℗ArtinAmerica℗07/01/2020℗℗The introductory wall text for the Shed’s grand retrospective of the work of Hungarian-American artist Agnes Denes (b. 1931), “Absolutes and Intermediates,” cites Leonardo da Vinci as a like artistic mind (as do numerous passages in the catalogue). The upper floor of the show presents an exhaustive survey of Denes’s work from the 1960s to the present day—drawings dotted with mathematical figures; anatomical studies and finely rendered graphs; and records of her efforts toward land reclamation and environmental remediation. The picture emerges of a prolific, intellectually omnivorous figure devoted to real-world change as much as artistic innovation, and the comparison to Leonardo—that visionary student of geometry and physics, architecture and flying machines—seems less absurd than it might initially have.The question, however, nags: why reach back to the fifteenth century? One could speculate that the Shed’s figuring of Denes as an unclassifiable savant more in league with Renaissance humanists than with her direct contemporaries serves in part to bracket the question of her relative absence from canonical narratives of postwar art history. The framing unmoors her from the artistic context of New York, where she has lived since early adulthood, and what is sometimes missing from the otherwise rich exhibition is an uncovering of the ways in which her practice does resonate with work associated with movements like Land art and Conceptual art. It is through this sort of unearthing that one best grasps the qualities that have, perhaps, rendered Denes’s work exceptional and hard to categorize: a disarming optimism, and a direct investment in the enrichment and longevity of humanity.“Absolutes and Intermediates” begins with Denes’s “Philosophical Drawings” (1969–80), a formative body of prints and ink drawings on graph paper, vellum, and tracing paper in which she attempts to visualize diverse corners of human knowledge—ranging from the formation of the universe to religion—in order to better understand them. The works’ conceptual scope might owe to Denes’s desire, early on, to combat the “fragmentation” of knowledge wrought by specialization. Thought Complex, a white-on-black monoprint from 1972, is a particularly representative “Philosophical Drawing”: dense with notated geometric projections and plotted graphs, the work, per Denes, is a “diagrammatic presentation” of thought processes. Largely obscure but abundant in visual interest, Thought Complex is a vibrant index of ideation, an image of neuronal fireworks. That we can’t completely crack its code is just as well, for therein lies its seduction. In Introspection I—Evolution (1968–71) and Introspection II—Machines, Tools & Weapons (1972), a pair of nearly twenty-one-foot-long monoprints laid out in vitrines, Denes moves beyond the brain and approaches the history of humankind. In the first work, she attempts, through cross-sections of skulls, studies of cell division, and taxonomic tables, to wrest encyclopedic order from the evolution of our ape ancestors to humans capable of art and science.The “Philosophical Drawings” recall the strands of ’60s Conceptual art that relied on numbers and language, even if Denes has stressed her distance from that movement. The exhibition label for the drawing The Human Argument (1969–70) notes that the work was first published in critic and curator Lucy Lippard’s landmark Conceptual art anthology Six Years: The Dematerialization of the Art Object (1973). Just as notable is that this and several other “Philosophical Drawings” were included in the fourth and final of Lippard’s “numbers shows,” as they became known (each was titled after the population of the city in which it was held). These exhibitions took place in the late ’60s and early ’70s and showcased an emerging generation of artists tending toward the ephemeral, “dematerialized,” and conceptual.Featured alongside Denes in Lippard’s show, German artist Hanne Darboven stands as a salient point of comparison, as her early graph-paper drawings crowded with calculations seethe with mental energy in much the same way as Denes’s “Philosophical Drawings” do. But if Darboven’s dizzy mathematical exercises strongly resist comprehension, even Denes’s most arcane investigations at least purport to make tangible and available that which is unapproachably abstract. Indeed, while much Conceptual art—particularly that of figures like Douglas Huebler and Dan Graham—approached questions of syntax, seriality, and authorship with an aloof intellectualism, Denes’s works of “visual philosophy” have a welcoming pragmatism, demonstrating a desire to accumulate and represent knowledge of the human. In her series of “Body Prints” (1971), shown on a wall opposite the “Philosophical Drawings,” Denes made ink impressions of her breasts and her then-husband’s penis on her ubiquitous graph paper, underlining her desire to give knowledge a kind of flesh.Also shown on the exhibition’s upper floor is ample documentation of Denes’s “Public Works” series, the environmental interventions for which she may be best known. Center stage is a presentation of the celebrated Wheatfield—A Confrontation (1982), a Public Art Fund commission for which Denes planted two acres of wheat in the Manhattan landfill that would become Battery Park City. One block from Wall Street, Wheatfield confronted a stronghold of late-capitalist excess with a plainly material gesture toward sustenance as a basic need, highlighting disparities of wealth and well-being and the continuing fact of world hunger. Wheatfield appeared as a brief, shimmering mirage: after four months, Denes harvested the grains and donated them to the touring exhibition “International Art Show for the End of World Hunger” (1987–90).The line between art and activism that Wheatfield straddles is made more porous by Denes’s efforts toward more permanent land reclamation. For the collaborative work Tree Mountain—A Living Time Capsule—11,000 Trees, 11,000 People, 400 Years (1992–96), which was sponsored by the United Nations Environment Programme and the Finnish Ministry of the Environment, Denes and 11,000 volunteers planted 11,000 pine trees atop a man-made mountain at the Pinziö gravel pits near Ylöjärvi, Finland. Represented in the Shed exhibition by architectural models and in drone footage, and powerfully framed as an ongoing project of collective concern, the living, breathing Tree Mountain suggests a belated retort to the canon of Land art and its frequent emphasis on inert monumentality.It should be acknowledged that, contrary to Denes’s own assertions, nuanced concerns around land use and abuse were not wholly uncommon among Land artists, particularly in the decades that followed the inaugural “earthworks” of the ’60s. Especially notable in this regard is Nancy Holt’s unfinished Sky Mound (1988–), an effort to transform a landfill in New Jersey’s Meadowlands into a public park. However, Denes’s Tree Mountain and Wheatfield contrast starkly with the efforts of figures like Michael Heizer, whose megalithic structures and earthen devastations, he has suggested, might just outlast a civilization extinguished by war and pollution. Refusing to accept an apocalypse as inevitable, Denes invests in our futurity, precarious as it may be.This dedication to the future is felt acutely on the intimate lower floor of “Absolutes and Intermediates,” which is devoted entirely to Denes’s “Pyramid Series” (1970–). In this series, she employs the form of the pyramid variously as geometrical abstraction, diagrammatic tool, and a literal (inhabitable) structure put to a variety of speculative uses. Many of the drawings on view depict pyramidal dwellings and monuments designed for an envisioned “Future City,” and the Shed has commissioned sculptural models of two such renderings. Model for Probability Pyramid—Study for Crystal Pyramid (2019) scales down the intended 100,000-block structure to a more modest 6,000 blocks, and renders them in 3D-printed, compostable form rather than in glass. This faintly translucent model, measuring seventeen feet tall and softly illuminated from within, is imposing and properly otherworldly. Equally affecting are the drawings that tease out the utopian character of Denes’s “Future City,” portraying self-supporting architecture and floating water habitats meant to provide safe haven, perhaps, in the wake of ecological devastation.Like Tree Mountain, whose pine trees the artist chose for their long lifespan (three hundred to four hundred years), Denes’s pyramidal dwellings and monuments presuppose a future in which humans have persisted, however improbably. The prospect that such pyramids might deliver us from the threat of rising waters, battering storms, and dwindling resources is more than a bit fantastical, even if Denes has argued that these structures “have little science fiction about them” and considers the drawings to be renderings awaiting realization. However, her unalloyed hope has a restorative power in our moment of cynicism, defeatism, and uncertainty. Here, as elsewhere in “Absolutes and Intermediates,” faith in the perpetuity of human life and knowledge is posited as the artist’s ultimate project: one that we are welcome—even compelled—to take part in. While the Shed’s retrospective sometimes lapses into detachment, dialing art historical conversations down to a whisper, it is anchored powerfully in Denes’s commitment to futurity. Upon leaving the exhibition, little else feels so urgent or necessary. This article appears under the title “Agnes Denes” in the January 2020 issue, pp. 73–75.
ArtNews℗A MoMA PS1 Exhibition Examines the Living Legacy of the Gulf Wars℗Rahel Aima℗ArtinAmerica℗06/01/2020℗℗In January 1991, armed forces led by the United States commenced combat against Iraq. Including a military build-up that started the prior year in response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the Gulf War lasted just shy of seven months. In “Theater of Operations: The Gulf Wars 1991–2011,” at MoMA PS1 through March 1, the conflict’s shadow extends over two decades of artistic production. The show is big, filling three floors with over three hundred works by some eighty artists and collectives, many of them Iraqi and Kuwaiti. Arranged in loosely chronological galleries, work in the exhibition grapples with the Gulf War, its aftermath, and the Iraq War (2003–11), foregrounding indelible images of protest and torture associated with it.Journalists like to say they’re writing the first draft of history. Less attention is given to artists’ active interventions in the same project. A tension between art and journalism runs through “Theater of Operations,” with a number of artists directly critiquing the media for its warmongering. As curators Peter Eleey and Ruba Katrib argue in their catalogue essays, the Gulf War spawned many aspects of our current media climate. Advances in satellite technology allowed nascent twenty-four-hour cable news networks to supplement morning and evening digests with constant updates. For the first time, civilians could get news about the war in real time, ushering in a fetish for immediacy—or at least the sensation of immediacy—that pervades the show. Thomas Hirschhorn’s cardboard sculpture Necklace CNN (2002), an oversize network logo on a giant chain, all wrapped in gold foil, hangs near the entrance to PS1, greeting visitors as a kind of station ID for exhibition. There are seventeen hours of video in “Theater of Operations,” including Michael Auder’s Gulf War TV War (1991/2017) for which the artist filmed his television as he channel surfed, flipping between soap operas, commercials, and jingoistic newsreels. The piece effectively captures the numbing tedium of endless, mediated war. But the exhibition also takes pains to present work by Iraqi and Kuwaiti artists like Thuraya Al-Baqsami, who directly experienced the wars and often registered their reactions using analog mediums like paintings and illustrated books.The global scope of “Theater of Operations” complicates our sense of whose interpretations of the wars can be deemed the most legitimate and authoritative. The curators highlight the artists and journalists who documented the conflict while cutting through the noise typical of broadcast television. Susan Crile was among the Western artists who rushed to region to document the aftermath of the war firsthand. Her Field of Fire (1991) depicts oil wells in Kuwait that had been set on fire by retreating Iraqis. Crile saw the apocalyptic landscape in July 1991 on a visit facilitated by Bechtel, an American company hired to extinguish the fires. One gallery includes work by Susan Meiselas, who in 1991 and 1992 took photographs of mass graves associated with Saddam Hussein’s genocide of some 100,000 Kurds during the Iran–Iraq War (1980–88). Most affecting of all is Dia Al-Azzawi’s Victim’s Portrait (1991), a painted portrait hung alongside a small newspaper clipping that features a photograph of a horrifically disfigured burn victim in Iraq. Though American newspapers refused to publish the photo, it became, like the images of burning monks in Vietnam, an iconic representation of the Gulf War around the world. Al-Azzawi’s painting is an attempt to restore both features and dignity to the man.The black-and-white photo is one of few graphic depictions of violence in the show, along with Hirschhorn’s Touching Reality (2012), in which a white person’s hand blithely swipes past gruesome digital images of corpses and carnage, occasionally zooming in (callously, almost pruriently) on particularly grisly areas. No less shockingly violent is a painting by Fernando Botero, Abu Ghraib 52 (2005), which features dogs attacking a blindfolded prisoner, the leash on one held by another white person’s hand, this time gloved. Although the figures are painted in Botero's characteristic roundboy style, the contrast to his usual lighthearted fare amplifies the inhumanity of torture. Even Richard Serra, an artist whose minimal formal vocabulary often suggests a highly constrained emotional range, was sufficiently moved by reports of torture to abandon his abstract style for Stop Bush (2004), a figurative drawing of the infamous hooded detainee at Abu Ghraib.The brutality-of-war beat, however, is largely outsourced to Iraqi and Kuwaiti artists working in a modernist idiom. I was particularly taken by Nuha Al-Radi's prints and puppet-like sculptures made from war debris, as well as Khalifa Qattan's wonderfully weird paintings, one of which—Kuwait is Burning (1971)— eerily prefigures the fires that would rage two decades later. There’s also an embarrassment of artists’ books from Iraq called dafatir, after the Arabic word for “notebooks.” Wall text explains that this medium became popular after sanctions made paint and canvas scarce. There are so many of the books that one longs for a more discriminating, edited selection. HAVING LEARNED their lesson from the consequences of granting press access in Vietnam, military authorities imposed a tight pool system of journalists covering the Gulf War, severely restricting their access to the frontlines. As a result, most of the video footage of the war came from the Department of Defense. It was recorded using night vision, often by cameras attached to missiles, creating a bloodless, futuristic perspective that led the conflict to be dubbed the video game war. The only game on view here, however, is Cory Arcangel’s Bomb Iraq (2005), a simple stop-motion representation of a missile’s final approach to its target, represented by a crude map of Iraq. (Hung on a nearby wall, in devastating juxtaposition, is a painting left unfinished by Layla Al-Attar when she was killed by an American bomb in 1993. There is some speculation that the attack was not a misfire, but retaliation for her mosaic of George H.W. Bush at a Baghdad hotel popular with foreigners, inlaid in the floor so that visitors would have to step on his face to enter.) The jerky motion of Arcangel’s game—which, according to the wall text, the artist found on an old Macintosh computer in a thrift store—makes playing it feel like reading an illustrated e-book, and so the work straddles an interesting divide in “Theater of Operations” between page and screen. It’s said of Arab literature that Cairo writes, Beirut publishes, and Baghdad reads, and this exhibition seems to offer a paraphrase to describe artistic responses to the Gulf wars: Iraq makes richly expressive books and paintings, the West watches on TV, then makes works about that mediation. Or: Western artists trade in facts, while Iraqis and Kuwaitis trade in feelings.While broadly applicable to some of the work in “Theater of Operations,” this dichotomy collapses in the work of younger diasporic artists like Monira Al Qadiri or Alia Farid who might have an impressionistic childhood recollection of the war that they have reconstructed and filtered through the conventions of contemporary art. Al Qadiri’s Behind the Sun (2013) features found footage of a Kuwaiti oil-well fire. The dramatic imagery associated with the environmental catastrophe—dark skies and huge trumpets of fire topped with voluptuous plumes of smoke—proved to be the war’s most enduring visual legacy. Al Qadiri’s work is projected in PS1’s basement gallery and can be viewed from a first-floor balcony. The distance between the audience and the event belies the origins of the footage, which was taken by a local resident who jumped in his car and sped off towards the conflagrations to capture them. Its vantage point is closer, more intimate than the usual network footage.Still, the best works in “Theater of Operation” don’t address the war directly, so much as have it in the background, like keeping the TV on for the noise. Addressing the war indirectly also avoids the danger of sensationalizing violence or aestheticizing “resistance.” Hiwa K’s The Bell Project (2007–15), a huge bell cast from melted-down munitions, is displayed adjacent to two videos that document the years of labor required to make it. Also of note is Michael Rakowitz’s Return (2004–), a mixed medium installation related to the artist’s struggle to reopen his Iraqi-Jewish grandfather’s date importing business in Brooklyn. His dates became the first goods available to the American public in three decades that could be labeled “product of Iraq.”Rakowitz’s participation in “Theater of Operations” is especially notable given his admirable early withdrawal from the Whitney Biennial in protest of board member Warren B. Kanders. Citing his opposition to MoMA trustee Larry Fink’s investments in private prisons, he requested that MoMA PS1 “pause” the video component of his installation—a request that has reportedly been denied. Rakowitz isn’t the only artist who employed a strategy of refusal to protest Fink. Phil Collins withdrew his work baghdad screentests (2002), a series of silent video portraits of Iraqis. The outcome is an empty room save for wall text stating that “this work has been withdrawn from the exhibition at the request of the artist.” The dark silence of the gallery is a powerful reminder that you don’t need to bring the war home. It’s already here.
ArtNews℗Rosa Barba Reveals the Secret Lives of Artworks℗Kaya Genç℗ArtinAmerica℗03/01/2020℗℗Rosa Barba, an Italian artist who studied theater and film in Germany in the early 1990s, uses analog film to examine the mechanisms of perception and memory and to explore—often by shooting in remote locations—what she has called the “margins, interstices, and interludes” of society. Her works have ranged from experimental installations like Machine Vision Seekers (2004), in which a moving projector throws words onto the walls of a darkened room, offering viewers a chopped-up narrative without images, to films like Outwardly from Earth’s Center (2007), an impressionistic portrayal of people attempting to stop the island they live on from drifting. Barba’s exhibition at Arter consists of “The Hidden Conference” (2010–15), a trio of 35mm films depicting the lives of art objects when they are not on display.In 2010, the Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía in Madrid invited Barba to orchestrate an exhibition of works from its modern art collection. The fruits of her nine-month research, “A Curated Conference: On the Future of Collective Strength within an Archive,” comprised forty-three works, dated between 1917 and 2008, by artists including Marcel Duchamp and Louise Bourgeois that she saw as sharing interests and conducting a time-spanning “subconscious dialogue” with one another. This schema inspired “The Hidden Conference.”Barba, using a handheld camera, shot the films in storage facilities belonging to Berlin’s Neue Nationalgalerie for About the Discontinuous History of Things We See and Don’t See (2010); Rome’s Capitoline Museums for A Fractured Play (2012); and Tate Modern in London for About the Shelf and Mantel (2015). “At an unspecified point in time, a witness observes the silent encounter of art works from different epochs,” the opening text in the first film reads: “Some of the protagonists ignore him, while others are friendly and invite him to join them.” In the film, Gerhard Richter’s Seascape (Sea-Sea), 1970, moves, as if by its own will, next to a landscape painting, while Michelangelo Pistoletto’s stainless steel Man with Shirt (1962) is shown coexisting with less easily identifiable works. Although the films, which are projected on three screens placed on the floor, show works in a kind of conversation, that conversation is purely visual and conceptual, with the works—wrapped in plastic, strapped to racks, and at times only dimly lit—appearing as if in hibernation. No museum staff members are seen in the films. Automated mechanisms move paintings along climate-controlled corridors; the same sculptures crop up in different spaces, with no sequences showing how they got there. The scenes raise questions about inclusion and exclusion in museum collections and displays: What happens to the value and understanding of an artwork when it is not publicly visible? What unseen forces are behind the decisions to put certain works on view and keep others locked in vaults?Barba’s partner, Jan St. Werner, a composer and one half of the German electronic duo Mouse on Mars, produced the films’ soundtracks—minimal compositions that combine sounds of the storage facilities (human voices, the buzzing of lights) with samples including dialogue and music from Italian movies. The protean soundscapes echo the shifting focus on-screen, where the footage moves between labels, metal fixtures, and marble arms and heads. At the gallery entrance, Barba has placed a chart diagramming links between the paintings and sculptures that participate in her “conference.” The image, which recalls Alfred H. Barr Jr.’s famous 1936 illustration of modern art movements, shows the connections strictly by way of lines, without explanations, and the rationale for those connections is difficult to glean. What the “Hidden Conference” project does convey clearly is the selective nature of the canon. In the films, Barba—using a medium whose growing obsolescence suits the status of objects removed from circulation—shows that art history relies just as much on concealing as on exhibiting. This article appears under the title “Rosa Barba” in the January 2020 issue, pp. 86–87.
ArtNews℗For Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, Painting Was a Site of Restorative Exuberance and Anxious Estrangement℗Ara H. Merjian℗ArtinAmerica℗02/01/2020℗℗In the years leading up to world War I, German artist Ernst Ludwig Kirchner developed a proto-Expressionist painting style that combined a vibrant palette and lurching brushwork and exemplified the ideals of Die Brücke (The Bridge), the group of painters that he cofounded in Dresden in 1905. Painting, in his hands, became a site of restorative exuberance and anxious estrangement, often in the same image. The curators of the Neue Galerie’s condensed survey of his work, Jill Lloyd and Janis Staggs, have organized the exhibition chronologically: beginning in Dresden and concluding in Davos, the Alpine Swiss town where he ended his career and his life (by suicide) in 1938. Between galleries devoted to these periods lie rooms dedicated to Kirchner’s time in Berlin, where he moved in 1911, and to his fateful experience of the war—which affected him long after he left the mounted artillery in which he served.For Die Brücke, innovation entailed a turning backward, to places, epochs, and subjectivities unsullied by industrial modernity and its overweening aesthetic refinements. By most accounts, avant-garde primitivism rippled outward from Paris in tandem with Cubism. Yet Kirchner and his colleagues admired objects seemingly unspoiled by Western modernity at the Dresden Museum of Ethnology. This is not to say that Kirchner ignored Western art. In his Portrait of Hans Frisch (ca. 1907), the subject’s face is daubed with motley color and his dark blue suit swirls with languid impasto. The image betrays a burgeoning interest in Vincent van Gogh and Edvard Munch, both of whose work he viewed during this period, as does the nearby portrait Doris Standing (1906). Here, though, Kirchner pairs demonstrative brushwork with a notable flattening of form. Like van Gogh and Munch, Kirchner, as attentive to inner states as to physical presence, increasingly married Impressionism’s schematic figuration to gestural flourishes. Showing two figures squeezed together by a narrow vertical frame and linked by a huge nest of interconnected hair, Two Nudes (1907) further evinces the tension in Kirchner’s work between the aesthetic poles of realism and symbolism.As the Berlin room demonstrated, Kirchner was a painter not simply of bodies, but also of spaces, which he presented as, by turns, alienating and idyllic. The warped interior of The Toilette (Woman before the Mirror), 1913–20, wouldn’t have been out of place as a set design for The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari. In Tower Room, Fehmarn (Self-Portrait with Erna), 1913, the erotic presence of a nude female body does nothing to make the compressed interior feel less claustrophobic. Two Nude Figures in a Landscape (1913), by contrast, exemplifies the affinity of the Brücke artists for the rejuvenating asylum of the natural world. The figures’ hunched, naked forms seem as much a part of the landscape as the rocks with which they rhyme formally do, just as their color echoes the stone outcropping at left.Kirchner’s famous 1913 Berlin street scenes feature prostitutes and bourgeois men pressed together in masses of transactional anonymity. The war would soon exacerbate the experience of modern cities as sites of estrangement. Kirchner’s nervous breakdown during his military service found expression in his work, most notably his painting Self-Portrait as a Soldier (1915), in which he depicted himself in uniform and raising an arm with its hand chopped off. Kirchner’s actual injuries were less physical than mental, and he sought treatment in the mountains of Davos beginning in 1917. A number of paintings, like the 1917–19 Life in the Alps (Triptych), capture the bucolic existence he witnessed there, while a large tapestry and a small rug he designed at this time evoke a folkish simplicity not only in their imagery but also in their medium.As the Expressionist who engaged most extensively with photography, Kirchner left behind over a thousand negatives. He shot many of his photographs in his studio, which appears as an active site for performances, artistic exchange, and the radical rejection of bourgeois norms. The exhibition includes several photographic reproductions, as well as drawings, a caryatid sculpture, and a wide range of prints—a medium in which Kirchner produced some of his most striking work. To cite just one example, the woodcut Windswept Firs (1919) places the viewer in a dense forest in which two figures walk along a path lit by a starry sky. Even more evocative of nature as a site of healing is Kirchner’s painting (1919–20) of a gorge in the Tinzenhorn mountain. A chapel nestles amid the landscape of purple and green crests, above which the sky glows green.Kirchner would return to this area for years to come. A 1937 painting of his mountainside studio shows an interior space crisply delineated and utterly confusing, a warren of angled walls and rectangular features suggesting mirrors, doorways, or framed canvases. To the right appears a doorway through which we see blue sky and trees—a rustic tranquility rendered all the more ironic for the date of its representation. In 1937, numerous paintings by Kirchner were hung in the Nazis’ infamous “degenerate art” exhibition. Less than a year later, the artist took his own life. This article appears under the title “Ernst Ludwig Kirchner” in the January 2020 issue, pp. 81–82.
ArtNews℗Constraint and Variability: Christina Ramberg’s Distinctive Brand of Figuration℗Scott Roben℗ArtinAmerica℗20/12/2019℗℗Most visitors to “The Making of Husbands: Christina Ramberg in Dialogue” probably weren’t familiar with the exhibition’s protagonist, an artist primarily associated with the Chicago Imagists who died in 1995 at the age of forty-nine and who remains relatively obscure even to American audiences. Those of us not already in the know can count ourselves lucky that Ramberg’s work has been slowly but steadily gaining institutional visibility over the past decade. The KW exhibition—whose title referred (somewhat perplexingly) to a documentary on John Cassavetes—served two purposes at once. For the uninitiated, it offered an introduction to Ramberg’s oeuvre by bringing together a limited but incisive selection of her paintings and drawings. At the same time, these works were installed alongside works by Ramberg’s peers as well as younger artists, establishing a network of open-ended affinities for viewers to ponder. Chief among the show’s achievements was its ability to suggest such links without diluting Ramberg’s own potency. From the mid-1960s on, Ramberg cultivated a brand of figuration that combined a Pop sensibility with graphic, mechanistic forms (one can sense a range of influences, but Léger is particularly present) that she deployed, rigorously and pointedly, in somber renderings of cropped female bodies. The show crescendoed from a scattering of early pieces to a succession of paintings from the mid- to late ’70s installed in the final, expansive room. The central motif in the latter work is the disarticulated female torso. Instead of flesh, Ramberg gives us hardness: ultra-flat masonite surfaces, closed shapes edged with precise shadows, and tight, symmetrically derived compositions. In paintings such as Tight Hipped (1974) and Glimpsed (1975), the body has stiffened into constructions that resemble padded dress forms, whose parts are squeezed further by locks of hair wrapping around them. Others, such as the diptych Sleeve Mountain #1 and #2 (1973), allow the same formal vocabulary to drift away from the figure proper, though they are haunted by it nonetheless. Within the installation’s sweep, the sense of binding and constraint conveyed in each image gave way to flux as the paintings’ parts appeared to morph and be redistributed from one picture to the next.The meat of Ramberg’s thinking became most apparent in a selection of small drawings made in pen on notebook pages or scrap paper. In these images, we witness the artist working through possible permutations of the same form—arrangements of fabric bustier components, bending knees, hair-braiding patterns. Flexing and folding across the page, these parts begin to assume qualities of the whole bodies to which they refer, even as they remain eerily other to them. Indeed, throughout the works on display, bondage, repetition, and reconfigurability fused in a trenchant vision of gender and the technologies that regulate it, one in which the tools of constriction are reconstrued as the basis of an energetic variability.Works by an eclectic group of thirteen additional artists were interjected throughout, building a context for Ramberg’s practice that was generally thematic rather than historical, though a handful of pieces by her Midwestern contemporaries suggested a sense of a local conversation in which her work participated. For instance, Diane Simpson’s Box Pleats (1989), a sculpture resembling a free-standing skirt composed of wooden slats, might have walked out of one of Ramberg’s paintings. Most of the additional works picked up on the themes of gender, mass production, and embodiment that Ramberg’s work explores, yet aimed their focus in slightly different directions. Especially compelling in this regard were pieces by Gaylen Gerber and Ghislaine Leung that extended Ramberg’s dissection of bodies and their accoutrements to the apparatus of the institutional exhibition itself. A painter of Ramberg’s caliber doesn’t need the company, but her work nonetheless benefited from being in the constellation this exhibition provided, which, by bringing her into a range of dialogues, exposed the richness at the base of her strict endeavor.  This article appears under the title “'The Making of Husbands: Christina Ramberg in Dialogue'” in the January 2020 issue, p. 86.
ArtNews℗In “Banal Presents,” Three Black Artists Intervene in Vast Social Institutions, from the Prison System to Education℗Tiana Reid℗ArtinAmerica℗19/12/2019℗℗“Banal Presents” was the final installment in a trilogy of exhibitions at the Institute of Contemporary Art curated by Meg Onli and titled Colored People Time, after a black expression that frames a supposed lack of punctuality on the part of black people as the effect of a particular sense of time. Using this notion as a departure point, Onli argues that black artistic work in the United States expresses a temporality that troubles normative society’s focus on productivity. The exhibitions—which will be shown together at the MIT List Visual Arts Center in Cambridge, Massachusetts, between February and April—invoked what literary scholar and cultural historian Saidiya Hartman calls the afterlife of slavery: “skewed life chances, limited access to health and education, premature death, incarceration, and impoverishment.” This latest show was preceded by “Mundane Futures” and “Quotidian Pasts,” which explored what might lie ahead and what already happened, though all three exhibitions blurred the lines between past, present, and future. The descriptors in their titles point to the ubiquity of the subject matter, while also (given their near-synonymousness) highlighting how things stay the same. “Banal Presents” comprised four works by three artists: Cameron Rowland, Sable Elyse Smith, and Carolyn Lazard. Although physically small, the show was conceptually large. Examining themes of private property, incarceration, education, and medicine, the artists intervene in institutions that seem too big to touch—even while they intimately touch the lives of vast numbers of people. Rowland’s Depreciation (2018)—which consists of legal documentation concerning his purchase of one acre of land on former plantation property and placing a restrictive covenant on it so that its value was depreciated to $0—walks the line between conceptual art and political action. Smith, meanwhile, engages with the ways in which the cruel logic of incarceration affects children. The ICA show featured her Coloring Book 33 (2019), a screen print of a page from a coloring book offered to children visiting inmates. Above the instruction to “Draw your own picture,” Smith has drawn a sideways rainbow and written, in a childlike script, NOT MY FATHER, NOT MY BROTHER, NOT MY COUSIN, NOR A CHEAP FUCK, NOT FRIEND, TEACHER, NEIGHBOR, ACQUAINTANCE, NOT MY FICTION. Her Pivot (2019) is a sculpture in the form of a toy jack whose prongs, topped with blue powder-coated aluminum circles, resemble prison visitation stools. These seats can’t be sat on, the jack can’t be played with. Smith uses the aesthetics of games to insist that keeping people locked in cages is hardly a game.Directly across the room, Carolyn Lazard’s fifteen-minute video Pre-Existing Condition (2019) brought the prison, university, and hospital into direct conversation with one another. The work draws on two sources: archival documents related to the research projects of Dr. Albert M. Kligman, a dermatologist who taught at the University of Pennsylvania (of which the ICA is part) and conducted experiments on inmates at Philadelphia’s Holmesburg Prison between 1951 and 1974; and the oral history of Edward Yusuf Anthony, a Holmesburg survivor. Struggling with illnesses related to long-term health effects of Dr. Kligman’s tests, Anthony experiences long days. “When I wake up, I have many pains, you know, my hips, my back, the arthritis—you know, I’m thankful. I’m thankful that I woke. But what I’m gonna do today? So I just get up and put out the trash, wash the dishes. Cook something for me and my wife, you know what I mean, turn on the TV, watch my favorite shows. Stuff like that,” he says. The juxtaposition between Dr. Kligman’s cold, typed black-and-white documents (shown on-screen as stills) and Anthony’s attention to the labor it takes for him to do basic household tasks—one after another, day after day—is jarring, and conveys how institutional malpractice plays out on the individual level. This last exhibition in the epic Colored People Time series seemed to suggest that, although the passing of time is universal, the present for black people is very specific: uneven, unavoidable, unrelenting. This article appears under the title “'Banal Presents'” in the January 2020 issue, pp. 82–83.
ArtNews℗The Restless Energy of Richard Tuttle’s Work℗Jonathan Rider℗ArtinAmerica℗18/12/2019℗℗Richard Tuttle’s work is grounded not in a single aesthetic, but in a straightforward attitude concerning materiality. He allows metal wire, rope, corrugated cardboard, and unstretched canvas to do what they want to do—hang, fray, kink, and bend—and finds in these tendencies compelling lines and shadows that become part of the work. His career has spanned five decades now, and it’s tempting to consider him historicized. But Tuttle’s story continues to evolve, as seen recently in two concurrent exhibitions at Pace—one featuring his drawings from the 1970s and held the gallery’s new headquarters in Chelsea, and the other consisting of his latest assemblages and staged at the neighboring satellite space.The ninety-four small-scale drawings comprising the former show were each titled basis, as the artist sees them as foundational to his practice. Rendered on sheets of sketchbook and notebook paper, the drawings feature simple, recurring geometric shapes: circles, triangles, half-moons. The physical characteristics of the paper itself—torn edges, rounded corners, the blue and red lines on the notebook pages—appear as essential to the works as Tuttle’s markings. The works hung on the walls in sequences that suggested lines of inquiry, so that visitors could view them as if flipping through a sketchbook and following the artist’s train of thought. This approach made for an engaging experience that might otherwise have been missing, since most of the drawings could not stand on their own. “Some of these drawings are works, even sculptures, in themselves,” he writes in the catalogue. “Some are visual thoughts or poems. Some are ideas to pursue. All are efforts to capture a fleeting moment in time, hold its value, and preserve it for a future use and moment.”A lone wall sculpture, 8th Wood Slat (1974), punctuated the show, dividing drawings from the early ’70s from those made later in the decade. The wood frames on the latter were covered in gold leaf. Given the drawings’ delicacy and intimate size, the use of gold was a curious decision. It could be interpreted as preciousness—or, perhaps, a light joke on anyone who might accuse his work of having that quality.The other exhibition, “Days, Muses and Stars,” featured eighteen wall reliefs (all 2019) in which layered curvilinear plywood shapes—recalling Picasso’s guitar assemblages or Elizabeth Murray’s shaped canvases—are topped with found materials, such as pieces of fabric, plastic netting, and a plastic container piled with spoons. Zigzag wood pieces resembling little staircases are incorporated into slices in the supports. All the color in these works comes by way of spray paint, and the diffuse hues beautifully accentuate the plywood’s grain. A smaller room contained miniature sculptures composed of wire, plastic, and other materials displayed on white shelves. The works’ titles—Pathos in a Void, Beet Greens, Yellow Brain Storm, etc.—were scrawled on the shelves’ edges: a rare moment of language entering a (sometimes comical) dialogue with physical forms in Tuttle’s work, which so often feels rooted in purely formal negotiations.Tuttle made the assemblages this past summer at his new studio in Maine, where, as the gallery notes, he was in an “intense state of inspiration.” It shows. The works are not only beautiful, but unbridled and fun. As these two exhibitions demonstrated, this pioneering artist is still pioneering after half a century, and producing work that retains a restless energy. This article appears under the title “Richard Tuttle” in the January 2020 issue, p. 78.
ArtNews℗In "Slant Step Forward," a 1960s Thrift-Store Find Links Two Generations of Artists℗Dore Bowen℗ArtinAmerica℗17/12/2019℗℗In 1965 William T. Wiley purchased a steeply inclined step stool covered in green linoleum from a salvage store in Mill Valley, California, and gifted it to his student Bruce Nauman. The two artists became obsessed with the ambiguity of the “slant step,” whose origins and function are still a mystery, and the object captured the imagination of numerous artists in their circle over the next several years. On the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of Sacramento-based artist and poet Phil Weidman’s 1969 Slant Step Book—a compilation of artists’ projects inspired by the object—the exhibition “Slant Step Forward” honored this unlikely touchstone of 1960s art, bringing together works included in the book and in related shows. Curator Francesca Wilmott also commissioned seven contemporary artists to respond to the object, extending the artistic dialogue catalyzed by the slant step to a new generation. These contemporary works introduced a queer spin to the slant step tradition, which was dominated in the 1960s by heterosexual male artists.Wilmott framed the show around Slant Step Book partly as a means of foregrounding the role of Sacramento artists in the slant step’s history. The exhibition highlighted the work of local figures like Ron Peetz, whose Slant Step X-Ray (2004, based on a 1969 work) is an X-ray providing an interior view of the humble object. The interweaving of the two generations didn’t entirely convince, nor should it have. Though all the artists in the show took the same object as a point of departure, they used it to explore different concerns. Many of the early works are jokey, macho, and self-mocking. A 1969 mail-art work by Ray Johnson, Duck Slant Step Pets, maps the names of the figures involved with the slant step around a horse/foot figure (a sendup of the classic rabbit/duck illusion), and was addressed to critic Rosalind “Con-Stable.” A 1966 sculpture by Wiley, Slant Step Becomes Rhino/Rhino Becomes Slant Step, looks more like a medieval torture chair than a step stool, with a phallic tusk sticking up from its seat. Whereas the slant step works from the 1960s are funky and experimental, the exhibition’s contemporary responses (all 2019) are generally more conceptual, formally refined, politically oriented, and cognizant of the gallery space, using the slant step’s awkward form to explore themes of gender trouble and body politics. Gordon Hall’s Two Part Object (After the Slant Step) combines two concrete objects—one white and curved, the other turquoise and aggressively slanted—and was placed at the entrance to the gallery, where it could literally trip visitors, while Terry Berlier’s “Nonorientable” sculptures consist of wooden Möbius strips that transform the angled step into circular bodies that rest lithely on pillows. Aay Preston-Myint’s two “Untitled (Fetish Object)” sculptural collages turn the slant step into a glory hole, and soften the object’s hard edge with purple draperies.The handsome two-volume publication accompanying the show includes a facsimile of Weidman’s 1969 book and an exhibition catalogue, the latter replete with essays and artists’ texts, such as Hall’s 2016 “Reading Things,” which uses the ambiguity of the slant step to think through the North Carolina “bathroom bill” restricting bathroom access for transgender people. The publication’s oppositional arrangement is perfect: rather than trying to suture the different impulses and aesthetics together, it emphasizes the distance separating these two generations and two world views, with only a step stool as a bridge.This article appears under the title “Slant Step Forward” in the January 2020 issue, pp. 85.
ArtNews℗Pastel Chateaux, Glittery Goddesses, and Stickers: Karen Kilimnik’s Latest Exhibition℗Rachel Wetzler℗ArtinAmerica℗16/12/2019℗℗In the 1990s, Karen Kilimnik’s name was virtually synonymous with the slacker genre of “scatter art”: haphazard installations of stuff that, like three-dimensional mood boards, circled around a theme. One of her works, The Czars (1991), invoked the execution of the Romanovs through a blown-up black-and-white photograph of the trashed basement of Ipatiev House, a pile of fake snow, various strewn baubles, and a length of pink tulle. Another, Battles, or the Art of War (1991), brought together equestrian portraits, tree branches, military standards, a prop cannon, and bric-a-brac on a green rug to suggest a Napoleonic campaign. When her focus shifted to painting mid-decade, this slapdash quality persisted. Kilimnik is often described as painting like a teenage girl, an oblique way of saying that her work betrays a sincere enthusiasm for decoration and is not, technically speaking, very good. Flecked with glitter and ornamented with Swarovski crystals and stickers, her paintings—dreamy depictions of horses, European palaces, lush gardens, ballerinas, witches, and fashion models—are characterized by loose, undifferentiated brushwork, muddled color, asymmetry, and clumsily outlined forms.Kilimnik’s ineptitude as a painter hardly matters, because she never really stopped making installations: in her exhibitions, she subordinates each painting to the ensemble, typically with weird and dazzling results. Kilimnik’s most recent exhibition at 303 included roughly seventy works from 2000 to the present, a not-insignificant number of which were also in her last show at the gallery, in 2016. But even the new works elicited a sense of déjà vu. Six of the seven paintings dated 2019 were in fact printed canvas-based reproductions of her previous paintings, now embellished with rhinestones and crystals.Small paintings, ornately framed collages, and photographs were hung salon-style—excuse me, in the “Petersburger style,” per the press release—in associative groupings accompanied by extravagant placards tied to gilt hooks with satin bows. The first group evoked the English pastoral, with a portrait of a stately hunting dog done in the manner of George Stubbs (the well-groomed worrywart out hunting, 2019) inserted into an array of photographs of cows, sheep, and big, blooming roses in the Cotswolds, and xeroxes of television and movie stills showing scenes of baronial camp. Another group, a cluster of eighteen paintings arranged in a loose pyramid formation, took up the diaphanous classicism of the French Rococo: pastel chateaux under bright blue skies, a pair of seashell tondi, the gilt insignia of the Roman god Mars looming over a landscape, as if it had flown right off the walls at Versailles. The goddesses Artemis & Ceres return to their niches to sleep after a hard day’s work (2016) imagines a pleasure garden at dusk, a sprinkle of diamond dust reinforcing the mystical animacy ascribed to the sketched forms of two goddess statues.It would be easy to dismiss Kilimnik as a twenty-first-century pompier playing escapist dress-up. But one set of works disturbed the atmosphere of light fantasy. A video titled The World at War (2018), a supercut of scenes from World War II films featuring troops singing patriotic anthems, played on a monitor that hung in an ostentatious gilt frame, flanked by paintings of chinoiserie tapestries and patterned porcelain. Leveling the distinction between military pomp and elegant ornament, the juxtaposition makes clear that Kilimnik understands the coercive force of the decorative: its ability to paper over social fissures, naturalize hierarchy, and recast the filthy misery of the trenches into a righteous cause. This article appears under the title “Karen Kilimnik” in the January 2020 issue, pp. 76–77.
ArtNews℗Brent Wadden’s Abstract Weavings Are Equal Parts Anni and Josef Albers℗Glenn Adamson℗ArtinAmerica℗13/12/2019℗℗Anni and Josef Albers did not have children. If they had, the kids might have grown up to make work like Brent Wadden’s. The Canadian artist uses Anni’s medium, weaving, to create abstract “paintings” whose color interactions would have made Josef proud.Wadden trained as a painter, but he has been working exclusively as a weaver for almost a decade now, producing textiles by hand. Ten new examples were on view in his recent exhibition at Mitchell-Innes & Nash, “Second Life.” All but one were variations on a single theme, consisting of vertical compositions bisected by diagonals formed by transitions between different colors of yarn. The exception, a tripartite horizontal composition, shared this basic language. The diagonals wobble pleasantly as they make their way across the pieces, their irregularity the result of Wadden’s inexactness as he weaves, and the slight distortion of the textiles that occurred when they were stretched for their framed display. A machine loom—or a more careful weaver—could have created perfect vectors. But those were not what Wadden was after. Like many other artists who have adopted fiber in recent years—such as Josh Faught—he has said that he prizes his own inexpert craftsmanship, seeing it as a means of infusing his work with an expressive touch. When he began weaving, Wadden employed a black-and-white palette, the better to emphasize his structural decisions. Color has become increasingly important to him, and for the works in this show, he ventured into vivid polychrome: bright oranges, deep blues, rosy pinks. The yarns are miscellaneous wools, cottons, and synthetic fibers, all sourced online from amateur weavers’ unused stashes. (Perhaps this recycling explains the exhibition title.) The mix of materials introduced further variation to the proceedings, with similar but not-quite-matching yarns creating striations in Wadden’s color blocks, and tightly spun yarns contrasting with mohair-like texture. The vertical works are perfectly proportioned to a smartphone screen, perhaps a slight concession to digital consumption in a show that otherwise demanded in-person viewing. Their upper and lower halves are made up of separate woven lengths that have been turned sideways, so that the fine white warp runs left to right and the thicker weft vertically. The seams between the lashed-together halves function as something like a horizon line, affirming the textiles’ pictorial status.As this slightly technical description may suggest, although Wadden positions himself in the lineage of abstract painting—his works echoing those of Richard Diebenkorn, Bridget Riley, and Agnes Martin—it helps to know a little about craft and its history to appreciate what he is up to. The details of process and materials, and the cultural associations of the handmade, give his pieces some of their life. Wadden has spoken of his admiration for the celebrated quilters of Gee’s Bend and the Nova Scotia folk artist Maud Lewis. In 2014, he was included in Nicolas Trembley’s exhibition “Mingei: Are You Here?” at Pace Gallery, a consideration of the Japanese craft movement of the 1920s and ’30s and its legacy. This was an apt context for him. Like the cosmopolitan figures who formulated mingei theory, Wadden’s cultivation of the imperfect has a certain knowingness to it, even a degree of self-contradiction. To create spontaneous and serendipitous effects, he seems to require a highly structured system. He is constantly negotiating between conscious sophistication and instinctive expression, walking a line that wavers like the diagonals wending across his woven abstractions.
ArtNews℗Did Sturtevant Invent the Meme?℗Travis Diehl℗ArtinAmerica℗12/12/2019℗℗Sturtevant didn’t copy, appropriate, or forge; Sturtevant repeated. The artist, who died in 2014, at age eighty-nine, is best known for paintings and sculptures that redo the signature works of other artists, ranging from Marcel Duchamp to Felix Gonzalez-Torres. When she took up video in the new millennium, Sturtevant often repeated the juicy burgers and waving flags of commercial television instead. Freedman Fitzpatrick’s recent exhibition of her rarely seen videos framed the works anachronistically as “memes”—a term whose association with digital imagery had barely begun at the time she made most of the videos. The designation makes a certain sense, insofar as it highlights the videos’ short length, deceptive simplicity, monotony, and wit. But these works resist the most crucial quality of memes: virality.The show was arranged as a face-off. Projected on one wall was The Dark Threat of Absence (2002), a fifteen-minute, two-channel video reprising Paul McCarthy’s video Painter (1995), which mocks the pretensions of Abstract Expressionism. Like McCarthy, Sturtevant struggles with condiments and paint while wearing a wig, smock, and rubber hands. But her version adds repetitions not present in the original, in the form of her grunting as she finger-fucks a jar of red paint or muttering “sex and death, sex and death, sex and death.” The opposite wall and part of a third were gridded with eighteen synchronized monitors playing a sequence of two dozen shorter videos (between forty seconds and five minutes long) assembled from ads and stock footage. When the McCarthy video played, the shorts did not, and vice versa; the gallery was always only half-activated, creating an atmosphere of suspense.Two thirty-second videos continuously playing on box monitors facing each other on plinths cut some of the tension. Both videos starred a paper hand waving from the cleft of a plastic butt. In one, a tiny voice says, “Hello!” (HELLO, 2006); in the other, “Hey, assholes!” (HEY, 2006). The exhibition ultimately asked whether Sturtevant’s mediation of the canon permits future variations, too—whether her repetitions can be repeated by others. This pair of screens provided the answer. Sturtevant waved hello to Sturtevant: her work is a closed loop.Instead of meme-hood, what emerged from the collection of videos was Sturtevant’s critique of value. The shorter works picked out and repeated ad absurdum the ways in which commercial culture tells us what matters. One particularly mind-melting short, Shifting Mental Structures Millionaire / Money (2000), features a montage of several crane shots over the sets of the game show “Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,” followed by a clip, repeated twenty-eight times, of a businessman fanning out stacks of cash as he declares, “Real live money.” Sturtevant’s videos shun the Darwinian-capitalist impulse of click-seeking memes. As she reused materials, she also rebranded them in a way that took them out of normal circulation. Many of these works come with a disclaimer from the artist in the credits: NOT FOR SALE. This is more a statement of principle than of fact. You can buy her art (including editions of these videos), but her art isn’t selling anything.
ArtNews℗Douglas Rieger's Sculptures Evoke the Pains and Pleasures of the Human Body℗Rahel Aima℗ArtinAmerica℗11/12/2019℗℗Douglas Rieger’s sculptures imply the human figure but aren’t exactly figurative. In his exhibition “Funny Business,” three large, free-standing assemblages composed of carved, oiled wood augmented with silicone, steel, vinyl, concrete, and upholstery foam sat at the center of the gallery, surrounded by smaller sculptures on triangular concrete shelves mounted on the walls. The sheen of the wood suggested that of sweat on skin, while chunks of pockmarked concrete appeared curiously flabby, evoking cellulite-dimpled thighs. Although adopting anthropomorphized postures, Rieger’s configurations of taut planes and rippling, muscular curves take considerable liberties with human anatomy. When the singularity comes and machines attempt to pass as humans, they will probably look a lot like these sculptures.The exhibition text describes the artist as a “finish fetishist,” and there’s a rewarding attention to surface in the works, particularly in the deft seaming and interplay between different wood grains. A handful of pieces have a distressed, almost shabby chic wash of plaster, like a body covered in dust at the end of a long workday. Meanwhile, utilitarian fasteners and fixings—gaskets, rubber bands, cabinet hardware—provide a libidinal charge. In a small untitled example (2019), a knob extends straight up from a pelvic form at a right angle, as if suffering from priapism. Others, like Love (2019), a white-painted object reclining on a bench and raising a leglike limb into the air, have lengths of floppy pink silicone tubing emerging from various orifices. Encountering the sculptures, I imagined a creation narrative in which a godlike figure hands out sex organs like Oprah gives away cars.Rieger, with his irreverent humor and carpentry skills, has inevitably been compared to H.C. Westermann. But unlike Westermann, whose work overtly critiqued midcentury American militarism and hyper-consumption, Rieger adopts a more intimate perspective that is often shot through with queer longing. This is most evident in Querelle (2017)—titled after the 1982 film by Rainer Werner Fassbinder, whose protagonist alternates between acts of criminal violence and gay sex—which resembles nothing so much as the teapot from Disney’s Beauty and the Beast if it were into light bondage, its phallic spout held in a taut loop of black string.Rieger’s works aren’t apolitical, but his critiques play out at the scale of the body. In Grand Poohbah (2019), the most beguiling sculpture in “Funny Business,” a wooden form loosely suggesting a head or torso rests on a geometric base of white boxes punctuated with mechanical cutouts, the combination evoking a vivisected cyborg. This was the least resolved sculpture in the show, lacking the confidence and polish of most of the works on view, but it hints at a theme found throughout the exhibition. The most remarkable aspect of Rieger’s sculptures is how sharply they invoke the conditions of labor under whatever stage of capitalism we’ve arrived at today. His forms appear tired in the manner of people. One pictures them arriving home grateful to be able to take off their bras, as evoked in a small untitled sculpture (2019) consisting of an impossibly hunched soft-bellied torso with drooping breasts. Imagine looking at a sculpture and worrying that it can’t afford health insurance to get treatment for its aching back—it’s business as usual, but there’s nothing funny about that.
ArtNews℗The Auteur as Artist: David Lynch's New Paintings and Sculptures at Sperone Westwater℗Jackson Arn℗ArtinAmerica℗08/12/2019℗℗David Lynch’s exhibition at Sperone Westwater, “Squeaky Flies in the Mud,” found the seventy-three-year-old auteur at his worst. Watercolors that might have been made blindfolded, paintings with layers of creepiness caked on like dried shit, themes and moods and motifs beaten into the ground—it was perfectly awful, and I sort of loved it.In a 2014 write-up for Hyperallergic, Thomas Micchelli asked if anyone would care about Lynch’s fine art career if he weren’t “one of the few truly visionary directors of our time,” but he didn’t get more than a couple paragraphs before admitting that his question’s premise was flawed. It’s surprisingly hard to separate Lynch’s fine art practice from his filmmaking. A student at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts from 1965 to 1970, he continued to think of himself primarily as a painter well after cinephiles had begun to revere him as a director. One of his first mature works, a stop-motion spectacle by the name of Six Men Getting Sick (Six Times), 1967, was film, sculpture, and painting all at once. His films are cannily cluttered with tchotchkes and wonky furniture he designed himself—I shudder remembering the little mouth sculpture that hangs over Jeff’s bed in Blue Velvet. Similar pieces found their way into the Sperone Westwater show: a chair that might be a torture device, a lamp that looks like it would bite your hand if you tried to turn it on, etc.In suggesting that Lynch the director and Lynch the artist are closely linked, I’m not denying that one is better than the other. His new paintings are rarely better than OK, and sometimes quite a lot worse; most often, they just seem like less than the sum of their inspirations. But I, for one, welcome the opportunity to see Lynch’s inspirations laid bare (or barer), and not just because he’s notoriously reluctant to discuss them. This show offered the same guilty pleasure as the recording sessions for Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band: something infuriatingly perfect became flawed, mortal, attainable.It’s tempting to talk about Lynch’s paintings, like his films, strictly in terms of favorite bits and pieces. At Sperone Westwater, there were gaping mouths and flailing little bodies sketched in thick lines, reminiscent of the late Philip Guston. What seemed most distinctly Lynchian about the show, however, was the sense it conveyed of a malevolence that can’t be pinned down to individual details. As the show’s title poetically suggested, Lynch delights in scenes of pain and captivity, the life slowly dripping from his figures. In Billy (and His Friends) Did Find Sally in the Tree (2019), as in so many of the works here, it’s unclear what role the parties have in each other’s agony: if Billy & Co. tortured Sally, she tortured herself, or they’re all merrily torturing one another.A quote from John Berger’s essay on the figures in Francis Bacon’s and Walt Disney’s work comes to mind: “the marks they bear, their wounds, look self-inflicted. But self-inflicted in a highly special sense. Not by an individual but by the species, Man—because . . . the distinction between individual and species becomes meaningless.” There was a generous slab of Bacon (one of Lynch’s key precursors) in this show, and there was even some Disney—Billy Sings the Tune for the Death Row Shuffle (2018) features a Mickey Mouse doll whose detached head floats queasily away from its body. This image suggests why the pieces in “Squeaky Flies in the Mud” fascinate and disappoint equally. In Lynch’s most arresting creations, something terrible is always hiding behind the dumpsters, some tightly coiled horror putting us back on our heels. In the works shown here—to borrow from Berger again—the worst has already happened. The tension is gone. It’s disturbing enough while you’re in the thick of it, but it fades fast.
ArtNews℗Hugo Crosthwaite's Riotous Work Portrays Life and Death in Tijuana℗Leah Ollman℗ArtinAmerica℗06/12/2019℗℗The National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C., named Hugo Crosthwaite the 2019 winner of the Outwin Boochever Portrait Competition, an astute selection for several reasons. Crosthwaite’s entry, a meditative, three-minute stop-motion animation about a woman migrating from Mexico to the United States, stretched the conventional bounds of portraiture and affirmed the genre’s relevance, both of which are aims of the prize. Over nearly two decades, Crosthwaite has applied portraiture’s concentrated attention not only to individuals but even more avidly to place. His most constant subject, his inexhaustible muse, has been Tijuana, the vibrant, complicated city of his birth. He lives and works now between San Diego, to the north, and Rosarito, Mexico, to the south.Crosthwaite’s exhibition at Luis De Jesus Los Angeles included an engrossing array of paintings, drawings, and animations he has made since 2010, all of them anchored in the fertile disjunctions of Tijuana’s social and physical landscape. Compressing the witnessed and the imagined into a quotidian surreality, à la Goya, he interweaves exquisite naturalism, punchy graphics, and noirish atmospherics in compositions that employ a tool kit of delicate pencil lines, gray washes, opaque black fields, and exposed white grounds. He fuses the tender, playful, audacious, and grotesque, casting death as ever present in the tragicomedy of life.The thirty-panel, twenty-five-foot-wide Death March (2010–11) represented a riotous procession of bodies and bones—James Ensor meets José Guadalupe Posada—in graphite, charcoal, and acrylic on museum board. This work faced a series of intimately scaled ink drawings rendering daily life in Tijuana as a matter of speculative fiction. In several compositions on canvas in an adjacent gallery, translucent streaks of paint acted like highlighter marks to intensify passages in graphite and ink depicting entangled and variously compromised and threatened figures. When Crosthwaite tweaks spatial logic, contorting bodies and the physical environment into impossible adjacencies and breakages, it reads as an undermining of the presumption of societal order. A final gallery housed multipanel pieces showing scenes of vernacular street life—motels, taco stands, carnival rides—augmented with comics-style overlays and spiked with found poetry in the form of fragmented signs.Crosthwaite’s smallest pieces feel just as immersive as the wall-spanning work, and his drawings no less dynamic than a set of four roughly five-minute animations that looped on separate screens at the heart of the show. Crosthwaite has made numerous murals in public settings, and these animations vividly capture that same process of imagery emerging live. In the videos, ink drawings for his unbound volumes called “Tijuana Bibles” (two were on display here in a vitrine) materialize via an unseen hand, charged narratives unspooling in time and backed by a soundtrack of the urban everyday—car horns, church bells, crying babies, laughter. In one sequence, a head appears, then its body, on the ground, hands twisted back unnaturally. A gun shows up by its side. Blood seeps from the corpse, spreading into a shroud of darkness. Fueled by Crosthwaite’s moral dismay (Trump appears in one hilariously carnivalesque scene) and fascination with carnality, violence, and displaced power, these nearly wordless texts on Tijuana serve as a new kind of bible—foundational but fluid, reverential but critical.
ArtNews℗In Meredith James's Sculptures, Furniture Becomes a Portal to Another World℗Eric Sutphin℗ArtinAmerica℗04/12/2019℗℗There is an element of surreal playfulness to Meredith James’s work. At first glance, “Shadows on the Wall,” her exhibition at Jack Hanley, looked like a sparse arrangement of nondescript midcentury furnishings: an armchair, desk, office chair, medicine cabinet, hanging light, and rotary phone. Upon inspection, these items revealed a surprise. Embedded in each was a trompe l’oeil sculptural relief depicting a miniature interior—another world contained within the ordinary furnishing.James’s previous works have often taken the form of immersive sculptures and installations that address perceptual phenomena. First exhibited at Socrates Sculpture Park in 2014, her installation Far from this setting in which I now find myself was an open-air version of an Ames room: a structure that appears to be a cuboid room when viewed through a peephole in its wall, but that actually has differing angles, a tilted floor, and perspectival distortions that together produce the optical illusion that people inside the space are of dramatically different sizes depending on where they stand. James’s installation featured a background painted to resemble a park promenade, exploiting the relationship between the depicted landscape and the surrounding environment to heighten its destabilizing effects.The most successful sculptures in “Shadows on the Wall” engaged the viewer in similar perceptual games on a smaller scale. In Gallery Reflection (all works 2019), the mirror of a plain wooden medicine cabinet was replaced with a scale model of the gallery wall opposite the sculpture. The work prompted the viewer to glance repeatedly between the actual wall and the sculpture to cross-reference the details: the radiators, bricks, molding, and fire escape were all meticulously reproduced, and an LED light gave the scene the ambience of daylight. While the embedded diorama was a convincing stand-in for a mirror reflecting the sculpture’s surroundings, the viewer’s own reflection was missing, disrupting the perceptual continuity of the encounter.The sound of running water emanated from Bathroom Sink, a wall-mounted rotary phone with its receiver lying on the floor beneath it. A quarter-size peephole below the dial revealed a minuscule white sink with a tiny working faucet. With the disorienting sound component and the seemingly impossible presence of functional plumbing, the sculpture possessed a sense of delightful absurdity, which was amplified by the extreme contrast in scale between the phone and the sink.In most of the other works on view, however, the relationships between the furnishings and the sculptural additions were less compelling. In Library, a diorama of a library with rows of identical books was inserted into a cozy armchair where the seat met the back. The illusion felt one-note, the artist relying entirely on the oddity of the inversion—a library inside a chair instead of the other way around—to animate the work. More arbitrary—and gimmicky—was Elevator Doors, a mustard-colored desk chair in which a small mechanized elevator door was embedded. The doors opened at regular intervals, revealing an elevator shaft. Ambiguity can be enriching, but in these works it suggested irresolution. Still, the sheer level of craftsmanship in each of James’s sculptures is commendable, and the miniatures commanded one’s attention even when the conceptual premise fell short.
ArtNews℗Kevin Guthrie’s Work Is as American as Beer, Baseball, and Watergate℗Joe Nolan℗ArtinAmerica℗02/12/2019℗℗Kevin Guthrie is a self-taught artist who draws portraits of pop-culture heroes and villains with pencil and crayon on the inner side of flattened cardboard boxes once packed with beer cans. The renderings are simple, but they brim with personality and social commentary. Guthrie’s previous exhibition at Julia Martin, “Bicycle Thieves” (2016), was the first in a planned trilogy of shows about the role of sports in American culture. It featured images of the opponents Muhammad Ali faced in his sixty-one professional bouts. The artist’s latest show at the gallery, “June 13, 1972,” commemorated the first Major League Baseball game the artist attended—New York Mets vs. Atlanta Braves on the titular date. Together, the drawings portray every player on the team rosters that spring day at Atlanta Stadium. The players are usually pictured individually, from the shoulders up and with their heads framed by black or white diamonds on colorful backgrounds. The surface of each of these portraits is textured by the uniform impressions of beer cans, and a label written above the player spells out his assignment: LEFT, CATCH, PINCH, PITCH. The white-walled gallery felt like a baseball card swap; you could almost smell the stale bubblegum. But the show also included depictions of politicians, criminals, and seedy entertainers, making it a contradictory portrait of the United States, in which the country’s corruption is evoked along with its wholesome values.In 1972 Major League Baseball marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of racially integrating its teams. Guthrie’s Riding the pines with Willie Mays and Tug McGraw shows Mays, a black right-handed home run king, in a dugout beside one of his Mets teammates, relief pitcher Tug McGraw, a long-haired white Southerner. Mays chomps on a blade of grass while holding a copy of Playboy. McGraw leans back to put his feet up as a rat scurries beneath the bench.This particular meeting of the Mets and the Braves happened just before the Watergate scandal, which began with the burglary of the Democratic National Committee’s headquarters on June 17, 1972. Guthrie’s These American patriots are going to break into the DNC Watergate offices in four days. No way they get caught pictures E. Howard Hunt, G. Gordon Liddy, and James McCord, the three men convicted of the Watergate break-in. President Nixon directed them to stop leaks of classified information from the White House, and this work’s one-word text label reads, PLUMBERS. These simple drawings could be called cartoons, but Guthrie displays more skill and self-awareness than most so-called outsider artists: he nails McCord’s high hairline, and Liddy’s mustachioed arrogance practically oozes out of the frame.Other exhibited works depicted the candidates who ran in the contentious 1972 Democratic Party presidential primaries. Portraits of Alabama governor George Wallace and South Dakota senator George McGovern flanked Guthrie’s version of a poster advertising the blockbuster “adults only” film Deep Throat. The porno flick’s title was, famously, the code name that investigative reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein gave their key Watergate informant, thus wryly conflating dirty politics and dirty movies. Guthrie’s juxtaposition of images in “June 13, 1972” further suggested that American political theater is its own kind of vulgar entertainment.Journalists were calling baseball the “national pastime” by 1856, just five years before the first battle of the Civil War. The sport has long been a force for unity within a divided country. Guthrie’s show, which pitted American ideals against American realities, came in the middle of another baseball season, as our country continued to seethe with debates about racism and executive malfeasance.  This article appears under the title “Kevin Guthrie” in the December 2019 issue, pp. 101–102.
ArtNews℗Torkwase Dyson's New Show Is an Abstract Meditation on the Racial Violence of the 1919 Red Summer℗Nicole Miller℗ArtinAmerica℗01/12/2019℗℗Torkwase Dyson’s work often uses abstract forms to address legacies of trans-Atlantic slavery and the African diaspora. Her exhibition “1919: Black Water,” at Columbia University’s Arthur Ross Architecture Gallery, brings together sculptures, drawings, and mixed-medium paintings that reflect on the murder of a black teenager named Eugene Williams in Chicago on July 27, 1919. While playing on a homemade raft in Lake Michigan, Williams and his friends unknowingly crossed the border between the black and white sections of the beach. A white man assaulted them with rocks, killing Williams. The incident sparked five days of black protest and white terrorism throughout the city, part of a wave of racial violence spreading across the United States at that time, known as the Red Summer.For this body of work, Dyson took as a departure point the form of the raft, an emblem of what she calls “black compositional thought”: the way black subjects navigate—and in doing so, alter—spaces shaped by white society. For Dyson, the raft functions as a site of self-liberation, representing the boys’ ability to create forms of mobility and play even amid the hazards of segregation and pollution from industrial runoff in the lake.At the center of the gallery, three black plexiglass sculptures in the shape of trapezoidal prisms are installed like a chain of islands (Black Shoreline, 2019). The structures are hollow—geometric tubes whose dark interiors render space palpable through qualities of opacity, occlusion, and distance. On the surrounding walls hang large paintings in which atmospheric applications of acrylic suggest dark waters. Additions such as sail-like triangles and angled white lines appear as tools to navigate the murk. Dyson alludes to the horizon throughout the paintings. In Pilot (2019), for instance, a horizontal bar of graphite cuts across a canvas awash in marine blues. Hanging from the bar, a mass of thick black string matted with glossy black paint evokes, at once, dreadlocks and polluted water running over a spillway. The painting Plantationocene (2019) similarly conveys a powerful sense of racialized space. Up close, the black central shapes suggest a raft seen at an angle from above, while the bright white streaks around it evoke glinting water. From a distance, however, the central form becomes a looming ship’s bow seen from the front; and the white marks, the beams of searchlights. The painting is titled after a term for our geological epoch that some scholars, such as Donna Haraway, prefer to the more broadly used “Anthropocene,” since it highlights the role of forced labor in the extraction economies that significantly influence global ecologies. In this show, Dyson suggests links between the once-segregated waters of Lake Michigan, present predicaments such as climate migration, and the Middle Passage. Speaking in an interview published in the exhibition catalogue, she relates the forms seen in the works to the circle of the iron collar, the trapezoids found on slave-ship diagrams, and the triangular pitch of an attic where an escaped slave once hid. “The shape makes the black,” Dyson said in a talk last year, offering a pithy summation of a practice devoted to exploring the shapes that coerce or enable the movement of black subjects. This article appears under the title “Torkwase Dyson” in the December 2019 issue, p. 101.
ArtNews℗New M. C. Escher Documentary Traces the Colorful Life of a Mathematician at Heart℗Claire Selvin℗℗02/02/2021℗℗"I fear that there is only one person in the world who could make a really good movie about my prints: myself," Maurits Cornelis Escher wrote to an American collector in 1969. This quote, which appears at the beginning of Robin Lutz’s new documentary about the famed Dutch graphic artist, M.C. Escher: Journey to Infinity, is one of many statements Escher made during his life about how his visually hypnotic works might translate into moving images.The new film by Lutz, which will be released theatrically in select U.S. cities and digitally on February 5, aspires to give Escher the kind of autonomy he craved with respect to such a project. Archival photographs of Escher's youth, images of his works, and new animations based on his art are set to readings from his diaries, lectures, and letters, narrated with gusto by the actor Stephen Fry. Punctuated by commentary from two of Escher's sons and many avid followers of his work, Fry's recitations of the artist's own words, if a bit theatrical and tedious at times, offer an entrancing look at how Escher became so fascinated by mathematics and the magical possibilities of patterns.M.C. Escher: Journey to Infinity takes a largely chronological approach to telling Escher's life. It traces his upbringing in a wealthy Dutch family at the turn of the century and his time studying at the Haarlem School of Architecture and Decorative Arts. During his youth, he would revel in the overwhelming quality of the organ music at St. Bartholomew's church in Haarlem, and the layers of otherworldly sounds he heard there would inform his later interest in creating illimitable tessellations, paradoxical architectures, and other scenes that produce dizzying and dazzling effects.Early in his career, Escher spent an extended period in Tuscany, where he ruminated on the shocking blueness of the sky and created many prints of the landscape. "My poor eyes are staring and my poor brain is trying to comprehend the incomprehensible," he once wrote of the scenes he encountered there, a statement might be interpreted as a kind of prophetic proposition for viewers of his later works. The film tells how Escher met Jetta Umiker, who he married in 1924, during his stay in Ravello, Italy, and how, when the couple moved to Rome, the artist would work in a studio on the top floor of their apartment, often taking to the city's street at night to sketch its architecture. "The most important thing I remember is the smell—the smell of the printing ink when he started printing was wonderful," George, Escher's eldest son, says in the documentary. "The ink nowadays doesn't smell nearly as good."M.C. Escher: Journey to Infinity also explores how the Escher family was impacted by the rise of fascism in Italy. They left Italy when George was 10—he said in the film that his parents wanted to shield him from his friends' "fascist activities" like marching and wearing black caps—for the frigid Swiss mountains. During this period, Escher took on a rather unexpected job, creating 12 prints for an Italian shipping company to be used as advertising aimed at tourists.Less unexpected but illuminating all the same is a segment of the documentary about how Escher was deeply impacted by the Alhambra palace in Granada, Spain, which he visited at the end of his stint at sea. Within the intricately patterned tiles and carvings at Alhambra he encountered "a motif that repeats itself according to a certain system," as he once described it. When the Escher family subsequently moved to Belgium, just before the outbreak of World War II, he began to create the topsy-turvy scenes that he would one day be known for worldwide.The remainder of the film focuses on Escher's most famous works, in his own words. During the years just before the war, he increasingly focused on mathematics rather than aesthetics, much to the bewilderment of his friends who knew his earlier oeuvre. This was the beginning of Escher's long pursuit of the "idea of expressing endlessness within a limited plane," as he once put it. Though the artist took a hiatus from printmaking and drawing during the war to take care of his family's needs—his wife's struggle with mental health is a recurring subject in the film—Escher's work started to garner widespread attention in the 1950s when it was featured in both Time and Life magazines.In the following decade, Escher was diagnosed with colon cancer, and he became reclusive, fixating on his elaborate processions of creatures and wildly structured worlds. He insisted for much of his life that he was not an artist but rather a mathematician, and he was perplexed when countercultural movements of the 1960s—hippies, in particular—reprinted his works in electric colors as opposed to their original black-and-white formats. Balking at what he saw as an incongruous pairing of tastes, Escher once said that his work was "cerebral and rationalized, instead of wild and sexy."There's something fittingly paradoxical about the fact that Escher's visual puzzles—the product of mathematical formulae turned against themselves, the artist maintained—should be so appreciated by people interested in dismantling the status quo. The film does not downplay this strange phenomenon, and it is a perfect encapsulation of the artfulness and ineffability of Escher's work that he would shy away from for much of his life as he pursued new frontiers on the two-dimensional plane.The musician Graham Nash, of the band Crosby, Stills & Nash, is interviewed at the beginning and end of the documentary, attesting to the enduring influence of Escher's work. He mentions that new avenues of meaning might be revealed as one continues to gaze at one of his prints or drawings."Escher taught me to see differently," Nash said. "And I'm very thankful for that."
ArtNews℗The Artist-Son of South Korea’s President Was Criticized for Funding His Latest Show with Corona Relief. How's the Actual Art?℗Andrew Russeth℗℗23/12/2020℗℗On Wednesday afternoon in Seoul, a dozen people waited outside the Keumsan Gallery to see a solo exhibition that has become a flashpoint of controversy, while a couple protesters waved flags nearby on the sidewalk. The issue at hand: the artist responsible staging the show, Moon Joon-yong (문준용), the son of South Korean president Moon Jae-in (문재인), had received a grant from a government relief fund set up to aid artists affected by the economic fallout from the coronavirus.“If you are a president’s son, shouldn’t you give a chance to other artists or give it up to someone else even if you were selected through the process?” Kim Geun-sik, a Kyungnam University professor who is a member of the conservative People Power Party, wrote on Facebook, according to the Korea Herald. (The president's Democratic Party is a liberal-leaning centrist group.) The grant is for up to 14 million won, which is about $12,600.Moon Joon-yong (or Joon Moon), who has exhibited his new-media art widely (unlike a certain other world leader's artist-son), has been quick to rebuff such criticism. "My scheduled exhibition was canceled due to COVID-19 and the gallery, curator, technicians, and other parties who signed contracts with me suffered losses," he wrote in a post on his own, the Korea Times reported. Most of the funds went to them, he said. The Seoul Foundation for Arts and Culture, which awarded the grant, told the Korea JoongAng Daily that standard rules were followed and that Moon was one of 46 to receive the money as a result of canceled exhibitions.It's all been quite a fracas. But putting that aside, the actual exhibition, "Beyond Your Eyes, Somewhere In Between," is elegant, alluring, and ingeniously engaging in one case.That highlight is one of six video-based works. Titled Augmented Shadow – Outside (2020), it features a rectangular table, with short walls on two edges, that holds a skeletal frame of a house. Projected from above onto those surfaces, a video shows ghostly black silhouettes of tall men with bright eyes walking through various rooms. All the while, similarly rendered children scramble about, leaving now and then through a door that clicks closed. Dishes and glasses clink, too, and watching this feels a bit like eavesdropping. A fearsome wolf stands to one side of the home, seemingly ready to pounce, below a chilly blue moon.This is satisfying enough, but the secret of the piece is a lantern the size of a large coffee mug that sits on a pedestal just beyond the table. It seems to be casting light onto the world. Pick it up, though, and steer it around the domestic environment, and it shifts the projections in real-time so that you can catch glimpses of other people (like a respectable-looking fellow in a shirt and tie), as well as the action in neighboring houses.A land that seemed threatening and haunted from that original angle turns out to be a great deal more welcoming—or at least more complicated and layered as hidden vantage points are revealed.There are also works that use classic abstract tropes of computer-generated art, as in Magnetism (2019), with its swirling, intricate lines and colors. The more captivating 소리를 향한 비행 (Flight Toward Sound, from 2019) depicts a kind of airplane form slowly cruising around a large, strange globe, from which blocks of color are emerging. When the aerial vehicle collides with one, a glowing, Music for Airports–style hum emanates from speakers. It gives a hint of the thrill of air travel, and is deeply soothing.Regrettably, though, this was a limited-run show—it ended its one-week stand on Wednesday—so those seeking to experience such relief will have to wait for Moon's next outing.
ArtNews℗One of Korea's Greatest Painters Is Little-Known Internationally. Finally, Yoo Youngkuk Is Coming Into Focus.℗Andrew Russeth℗℗10/12/2020℗℗Any artist going through a rough patch—working a day job, not making art, struggling amid darkness—should take a huge dose of solace from the remarkable life of Yoo Youngsuk.In 1943, after eight years in Japan, where he learned art and made abstract wood pieces while moving in avant-garde circles, Yoo quit the country in the face of new repressive measures. Then in his late 20s, he returned to the village of his birth, Uljin, on Korea’s east coast, followed by the Tokkō secret police, and worked as a fisherman.Japanese colonial rule ended in 1945, and Yoo eventually got back to art, in Seoul, helping to form the New Realism Group, the first artist association in the country devoted to painting in pure forms. The Korean War’s outbreak in 1950 soon ended that exhilarating period. He sold firewood to support his family and, when North Korea occupied the city, was drafted to help decorate a theater with portraits of Communist leaders. (He protested, rather bravely, that, as an abstract artist, he couldn’t do it, so he was ordered to handle the clothing.) After fleeing the capital for the coast, he repaired his father’s dilapidated distillery and produced soju to make ends meet.But when Yoo was finally able to return to painting in Seoul, in 1955, he let it rip.Sturdy abstracted landscapes rendered in oil on canvas—solid blobs of intriguing colors and thin black lines—quickly gave way to quick, slashing marks, rough-hewn surfaces, and shadowy passages. (Imagine William Baziotes spiked with delirious energy.) By 1960, Yoo had found his trademark subject, the mountains of Korea, whose forms he honed into hard-edged wonders in brilliant hues—searing yellows, enveloping purples, and glowing reds. They suggest that a kind of humble, calm spirituality, and even joy, is present in nature.Yoo, who died in 2002 at the age of 86, is a canonical artist in Korea’s postwar art history, a status confirmed by a 2016 survey at the National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art (MMCA) in Seoul on the centennial of his birth. But he remains little-known abroad. He has never had a solo show outside South Korea, and his radiant, sometimes mysterious paintings have appeared in group shows beyond its borders only sparingly. Blessedly, though, a sumptuous new monograph from Rizzoli with illuminating essays is an occasion for everyone to catch up.Yoo Youngkuk: Quintessence was edited by the writer and curator Rosa Maria Falvo, who proposes that the artist’s “entire oeuvre is part memoir and part poetic manifesto.” To be sure, he walked a singular path. While he operated in the resolutely abstract vein of European radicals like Jean Arp and Piet Mondrian while in Japan, Yoo’s art in postwar South Korea almost always evinces some trace of the real world. Noting the rapid, wrenching modernization underway in the country during Yoo’s life, former MMCA director Bartomeu Marí muses that the artist’s focus on age-old landscapes was “an exercise of resistance to this velocity and mechanization.”One satisfying outcome of this scholarly endeavor would be for Yoo's paintings to enter a dialogue with those of global peers. Gabriel Ritter, a Minneapolis Institute of Art curator, makes intriguing aesthetic connections to Ellsworth Kelly and Sadamasa Motonaga in his essay. And the mystical tone that imbues some of Yoo's most indelible work has loose formal links with figures as disparate as Forrest Bess and Hilma af Klint. (H. G. Masters has also noted the artist's affinity to that other ingenious chronicler of mountains, Etel Adnan.)Seeing Yoo included in more shows of postwar painting will be thrilling, but judging by the rich chronology assembled by MMCA curator Ihnbum Lee, there's also an opportunity for a serious biopic. It would feature a debonair Yoo dancing in the Tokyo tango scene, surviving the depredations of war, and forming one forward-thinking artist group after another in Seoul. He left them all in 1964, around the time of his first one-person show, charting his own way. (He was 49, older than Willem de Kooning when he had his first solo.)An early scene in that film might show Yoo leaving home in 1935, bound for Japan, with the dream of becoming a sailor and seeing the world. Instead, he became an artist, which he said offered “absolute freedom”—the opportunity to go on other kings of journeys. His paintings are invitations to join him.See more works by Yoo Youngkuk below.
ArtNews℗With Her Monumental Fountain in London, Kara Walker Offers a Gift We Shouldn't Accept℗Rianna Jade Parker℗℗26/02/2020℗℗When he was the mayor of London, in 2008, Boris Johnson endorsed a proposal to erect a £4 million bronze statue memorializing the survivors of British slavery. The figures in the proposed monument were to be Black, making it unlike other statues of its kind, which typically pay homage to white abolitionists like William Wilberforce. Johnson agreed that Hyde Park, just a short walk from Buckingham Palace, was “a fitting site for a permanent memorial to the millions who lost their lives.” But now, as Prime Minister, Johnson and the Conservative government have refused to fund the monument, in what many consider a sign of political and cultural regression.Twelve years on, Kara Walker is showing her own monument to the transatlantic slave trade, Fons Americanus (2019), at Tate Modern in London. The work was instantly praised by many journalists for what they perceived as a subversive take on its subject matter. The New York Times’s review of the work called it a “monumental jab” at Britain’s ugly history; the Guardian’s piece on it echoed that language, calling it a “rebuke” that serves as a “bold subversion of exultant Victorian kitsch.” But one wonders whether a more introspective version of the monument was possible—and whether Walker was the right person for the job at all.Regardless, people have seen the work in droves. Three million visitors are expected to enter Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall before Walker’s piece is removed on April 5, and the attraction to it may derive, in part, from its grand ambitions: Walker has said she is presenting Tate with a “gift to the heart of an Empire that redirected the fates of the world.”Fons Americanus alludes to the history of the Victoria Memorial, a statue near Buckingham Palace of Queen Victoria, Britain’s longest-reigning monarch before the present one. (The proposed memorial that Johnson endorsed would have stood less than a mile from it.) At 65 feet tall, the Victoria Memorial features a gilded winged Victory standing on a globe with various allegorical figures around it. Ships, mermaids, and other marine life decorate a fountain at its base. Victoria’s 65-year reign coincided with the shift of Great Britain from a colonial power to a maritime juggernaut. Under Queen Victoria's tenure, the Industrial Revolution transformed British society—and manufacturing worldwide. At the time, Great Britain was the most powerful country on earth—truly "the empire on which the sun never sets."Walker’s version is almost half the height of the Victoria Memorial and is made with sustainable materials, such as cork, soft wood, and metal. At its crown, the arms of a character typical of Walker are outstretched wide enough to receive the sky. Venus is bare-chested with a sarong wrapped around her waist. Her head is thrown back, causing her back to arch—which makes sense for a figure with a slashed throat that is erupting water. From the nipples of her bare breasts flow two more spurts.It’s right in line with other work by Walker, who is known for combining sex and violence through silhouetted scenes of the Antebellum South that make visible brutal histories of racism and misogyny. African-American artists have accused Walker’s distressing scenes of being inappropriately titillating, with Howardena Pindell and Betye Saar among her biggest detractors. In the 1991 PBS series I'll Make Me a World, Saar said, "I felt the work of Kara Walker was sort of revolting and negative and a form of betrayal to the slaves, particularly women and children; that it was basically for the amusement and the investment of the white art establishment."Art history from Europe and America is often a frequent point of reference for Walker—in particular the paintings of J. M. W. Turner and Winslow Homer, who serve as inspirations for Fons Americanus’s tense imagery. In Homer’s The Gulf Stream (1899), there is a capsized ship with a floating passenger who is seemingly oblivious to a gnawing shark at his feet. In Walker’s work, that man returns, but behind him is a dreadlocked maroon wearing a snorkel and swimming away from sharks not unlike the ones that trailed slave ships from one edge of the Atlantic to the other, feasting on human remains thrown overboard during the Middle Passage.This is a work intended to bring history back to the present—an idea made literal through some of Walker’s allegorical figures. Her sculpture features a captain, who sits stoutly at the front of the fountain synchronously representing two Black men, Toussaint L’Ouverture (1743–1803) and Marcus Garvey (1887–1940), who led quests to dismantle European imperialism at very different points in history. To the left of the captain is a tree from whose branch dangles a noose, an innocent and silent witness to the history of lynching. To the captain's right, a kneeling man—a slaver—pleads remorsefully. Humbly positioned at the back of the fountain, Queen Victoria herself forces a smile while a despondent figure crouches under her skirt. A Nefertiti-style headdress substitutes for Victoria’s famed widow's cap.In Fons Americanus, Walker is navigating complicated interwoven historical strands. Another sculptural element of the fountain has a young Black child peeking out from inside a scallop shell, his head angled in agony as tears flow from his eyes into a puddle. Descriptions of the work connect his solitude to the commercial fort on Bunce Island in Sierra Leone where the highly valued rice-growing skills of the indigenous people made it one of the most lucrative slave-trading operations in West Africa.In a film accompanying the work, available via Tate, Walker says, “I'm not an actual historian, I’m an unreliable narrator.” We should take her at her word. Despite her attempt to explore the interconnected histories of Africa, Europe, and the Americas, Walker insists that “slavery didn't exist on [England’s] shores”—a common misconception that a rudimentary Google search would prove wrong. Unabashed by her own ignorance, Walker recently told the Guardian: “From my perspective, [the U.K.] always seemed a fairly advanced place to be. To be Black and British and get a good education and have a good vocabulary and not have this legacy of systemic violence and educational and economic oppression.”In the Guardian, Walker said she was only forced to contend with her misguided perspective after news of the Windrush Scandal, a widely publicized controversy in 2018 that erupted around the systematic deportation and detention of Black British citizens by the U.K. Home Office, many of them of Caribbean descent, who had come to England as children as part of the Windrush Generation. As recently as February 11, the Home Office attempted to carry out a scheduled deportation of 56 people to Jamaica. Despite a last-minute court ruling and more than 150 cross-party MPs urging Johnson to stop the flight, only 25 people were allowed to remain in the U.K. In the wake of such activities, Walker’s sentiments expose a disappointing and offensive lack of understanding that would allow for such a flattening of Black British life and history.But the onus falls on Tate, too. With three of her works already in the institution's permanent collection, and following her first project at Tate Liverpool in 2015, Walker joins a long line of African-American artists who have benefited from the myth of American exceptionalism in British institutions. One can almost understand why Tate thought to choose her for the work. Walker has been critical of public monuments for years, long before others were focused on the subject, and she has been widely praised in America for works such as a 35-foot-tall sugar sculpture of a mammy figure situated in Brooklyn’s Domino Sugar Factory. But the commissioning of Fons Americanus as a counter-memorial to colonial public monuments is unconvincing because it fails to do what any good statue should—deal with its site and the context surrounding it.Walker has done nothing to wrestle with the history of Tate’s founder, the sugar merchant Sir Henry Tate, who many have said profited from the employment of slaves. On its website, Tate tells us, “Raw sugar imported from the British Caribbean by the Tate or Lyle companies in the post-slavery era would have been from estates established under slavery but worked at that point by wage-laborers and by indentured labor.” Tate removes itself from responsibility through the creative titling of exploited labor. The generational consequences of centuries of sugar production by enslaved Africans owned as property will always be tied to the land, its raw materials, by-products, and all beneficiaries through primary and secondary markets.If it were afforded the same resources and an international stage, could a community-based and collaborative process involving Black British artists have resulted in something more nuanced? It certainly seems that any attempt would have done so. And if such a project were to be undertaken, I’d suggest artist Hew Locke as its leader. Born in Edinburgh, Locke spent his formative years in Guyana, arriving just in time for Independence from Britain. Locke has been celebrated for his innovative amalgamations of history and modernity. His elaborate and embellished model naval ships rely on freighted symbolism as a way of pondering British control in war, trade, and culture. He has spent decades appropriating the iconography of sovereignty while undoing the mythology that guides it. Since the mid-1990s, Locke has spent his career reappropriating the iconography of sovereignty: vessels, heroes, banknotes, costumes, regalia of state, and the Queen herself. After the financial crash in 2008, Locke began collecting company share certificates and painting on the surface of the paper relics that once represented fortunes. The amount of money borrowed for the 1833 Slavery Abolition Act was so large that it wasn’t settled until 2015, meaning that British taxpayers like myself and Locke were still paying off government debt borrowed to pay millions in compensation to wealthy slave owners. Knowing this I wouldn’t associate Britain with being a “fairly advanced place to be.”Walker is no stranger to spectacle, and her use of it has often obscured some of the debates surrounding her art. In a press release for a 2017 exhibition at Sikkema Jenkins & Co. gallery in New York, Walker, referring to herself in the third person, predicted that “Students of Color will eye her work suspiciously and exercise their free right to Culturally Annihilate her on social media”—essentially dismissing critiques such as mine in advance as a by-product of intergenerational disagreements over politics and forms of expression. For many, a blind allegiance to Black artists, especially women, is a self-preserving practice of community-building. But tenacity does not trample care or respect, and to fully engage with this work, we need to talk about it for what it is: an unnuanced portrayal of a subject Walker doesn’t know enough about. If Walker is, as she claims, offering a “gift,” I choose not to accept it.
ArtNews℗Speak My Language: Art in New Zealand Addresses Inclusivity and Accessibility℗Claire Voon℗℗20/02/2020℗℗Among the eye-opening experiences for a visitor to New Zealand (or Aotearoa, the nation’s traditional Māori name) is finding wonder in the prevalence of bilingual signage and didactics. Text often appears in English and te reo (“the language” in Māori)—the predominant language of the area until the 20th century—and for someone who lives in America, where multilingual exhibitions are so revolutionary that they inspire self-congratulation, such a small but meaningful decolonizing gesture feels radical. How stories are told and whose voices are acknowledged were recurring themes in the art on view from Auckland to Wellington, Christchurch to New Plymouth—where artists have complicated records, contested histories, and asserted truths of their own experience.The most ambitious work comes from Ruth Buchanan, who exposes the power dynamics behind canonization. For her exhibition “The scene in which I find myself / Or, where does my body belong” (on view through March 22), Buchanan selected close to 300 artworks from the 50-year-old collection of the Govett-Brewster Art Gallery/Len Lye Centre in New Plymouth to fill five galleries, each dedicated to a decade and showing works that are artists’ first acquisitions by the museum.The crowded displays organized by categories of Buchanan’s own devising (Female, Male, Living, No longer living, Māori, In or Around the Pacific, Legs, Hands, Exception) pulled nearly one-third of the Govett-Brewster’s collection of primarily New Zealand art, and the imbalances in it are clear: Those in power have historically valued white artists more highly than indigenous ones, and men more highly than women.Buchanan forgoes wall labels for a thick booklet that lists and maps every artwork, complete with acquisition notes and exhibition histories. Few museumgoers would attempt to absorb all such data while taking in the show, but Buchanan seems less interested in highlighting individual narratives than she is in highlighting the paradoxical nature of institutional language that simultaneously defines and flattens identity. Her chronology and “departments” help us digest the collection, but what are our expectations when we step into a space labeled “Female” or “Male”? How can museums address their limitations? What would an inclusive, accessible collection look like?Similar questions lingered at the Christchurch Art Gallery Te Puna o Waiwhetū, where “Māori Moving Image: An Open Archive” (closed January 26) showcased four decades of animation, film, and video work by 19 Māori artists, and served as a salve to the many collections of work by white artists who have treated Māori culture as theirs to consume. Te Rarawa artist Ana Iti confronted contemporary perceptions of indigenous people in a 20-minute video in which she crouches by dioramas of early Māori settlements in simplistic contexts at a historic museum nearby, her presence a quiet protest of museological representations that deny sovereignty.In a three-channel video installation that immersed viewers in misty scenes of a polluted timber town, artist Natalie Robertson (Ngāti Porou, Clann Dhònnchaidh) lamented the desecration of land steeped in tribal histories and mythologies. Another installation by Terri Te Tau responded to state-sanctioned surveillance of Māori—with visitors entering an ominous black van inside of which dashcam footage played on the windshield, giving an eerie tour of houses raided as part of an “anti-terror” police operation that targeted Māori communities.Teeming with indigenous knowledge, “Māori Moving Image” made certain viewers aware of their own relationship to Māori culture—knowing, unknowing, or perhaps somewhere in between. Standing at the exhibition’s entrance was a multimedia gateway by Lisa Reihana evoking traditional waharoa archways that are carved with ancestral portraits and frame the entry into important community grounds. The work enlisted 11 monitors showing looping videos of her friends and family in traditional Māori dress, colonial garments, and contemporary workwear, some posed as if in a photography studio and others performing stereotypes of the “noble warrior” and the “Māori belle.” Referencing ethnographic photographs of old, Reihana’s moving album reclaimed power in image-making while marking a threshold where cultures might meet.Behind that streamed a video by Rachael Rakena (Ngāi Tahu, Ngā Puhi) engaging the fact that not all indigenous knowledge is everyone’s to access. Dancers moved in water as email snippets scrolled over the scene, with words revealing a dispute among whānau (extended family) over questions related to publicly sharing knowledge of a traditional food-preservation skill. Rakena suggests that, just as water serves as terrain tied to Māori identity, the internet can offer space to connect to indigenous traditions—though it complicates the protection of collective culture. For non-Māori, this means accepting that we are not entitled to certain indigenous information even if it seems to circulate freely.Back on the North Island of New Zealand just outside Wellington, the Dowse Art Museum show “Strands” (up through March 22) brings together four rising Māori artists exploring identity in distinct ways that combat a singular, static concept of what it means to be Māori. Arapeta Ashton celebrates the role of a kaitiaki—a guardian of weaving techniques—through the laborious transformation of kiekie plant fibers into kākahu cloaks that connect wearers to ancestors. Hā, a serene video whose title translates as “breath,” shows Ashton’s dedicated preparation of long leaves to breathe life into, while a finished kākahu floats like an elegant cascade of light in the middle of the gallery.Nearby, Ayesha Green’s small paintings repeatedly connect her name with those of her mother and grandmother in childlike cursive lettering. Ana Iti, too, considers the relationship between language and identity with letters that represent Māori pronunciation and dialects carved in boxes of sand, preserving oral and written forms in reliquaries that literally carry a (sense of) place. Chevron Hassett’s photographic series The Children of Māui more explicitly weaves personal histories with landscape, documenting intimate and joyful moments from trips around his home, or tūrangawaewae (meaning “domicile” or a “place to stand”).Further meditations on home fill a neighboring gallery at the Dowse, where Olivia Webb’s affecting five-screen video installation (through March 22) visits five families in their living rooms, performing songs they wrote about place and belonging in New Zealand. Reminiscent of Ragnar Kjartansson’s The Visitors, Webb’s Anthems of Belonging magnifies the diversity of lived experience, urging us to listen to expressions of a variety of values, concerns, and desires.In Wellington proper, installed along the main street of the bustling Courtenay Quarter (through March 8), Jasmine Togo-Brisby has presented a series of haunting light boxes that illuminate her family history as a fourth-generation Australian South Sea Islander. Her work, titled If these walls could talk, they’d tell you my name, features larger-than-life silhouette portraits of the artist, her daughter, and her mother against images of Wellington Town Hall’s ceiling, which is undergoing restoration. The historic architecture is entwined with the story of a fourth woman: Togo-Brisby’s great-great-grandmother, who was shipped from her island to Sydney as a child and served the Wunderlich family, founders of the company that produced those ornate namesake ceiling tiles. Unmissable during both day and night, the matrilineage makes evident colonial traumas and asks: Whose heritage do we choose to remember, value, and protect?Another outdoor work on the terrace of the Auckland Art Gallery Toi O Tāmaki, Sorawit Songsataya’s The Interior (on view into November), pays tribute to lost nature by way of native and endemic birds sculpted from creamy white Oamaru stone surrounding a massive blue, resin-cast moa, a species of flightless bird that went extinct some 700 years ago. The arrangement draws on a 1907 painting of birds gathered to mourn “the last moa,” effectively placing viewers within the scene while inciting sympathy, sorrow, and shame. Although longing for the past, it could be an elegy for a not-so-distant future when creatures and beings of all kinds will be relegated to a history we cannot revise.A version of this article appears in the Spring 2020 issue of ARTnews, under the title “Speak My Language.”
ArtNews℗Bay Watch: The Past and Present Clash in Exhibitions in Ever-Changing San Francisco℗Sarah Douglas℗℗19/02/2020℗℗Over the past several decades, San Francisco has become the worldwide seat of technological innovation and, not coincidentally, one of the toughest cities on earth in which to find an affordable place to live. It wasn’t always so. The Chinese-American photographer Michael Jang, a Northern California native whose survey show was on view (through January 18) at the McEvoy Foundation for the Arts, captured a San Francisco you might not otherwise know ever existed if you’re younger than, say, 40. While Jang was working on his MFA at the San Francisco Art Institute in the late 1970s, his stomping grounds were the district known as South of Market, where his subjects included gay culture and the punk scene.Jang captured several editions of the annual Hookers Ball, one of them featuring the sui generis Grimes Poznikov, the Automatic Human Jukebox (a freaked-out fellow with a Christ-like beard playing a trumpet or any other of a half-dozen instruments he kept available). But Jang’s most haunting photograph from that era showed a desolate South of Market street corner in 1976 beyond which there was a clear view of the buildings that tell the story of the city’s changing skyline. Between 1965 and 1972, the high-rises succeeded one another as San Francisco’s tallest (the reigning champion at the time being William Pereira’s famously hideous Transamerica Pyramid, which critics dubbed “Pereira’s Prick”).Two years ago, the Pyramid lost its standing as tallest to another South of Market behemoth, the nearby 1,070-foot Salesforce Tower. Salesforce, the digital customer relations company founded in 1999, is now among the city’s largest employers. Simon Denny, an artist born in New Zealand and based in Berlin, has been thinking a lot about Salesforce lately, as evidenced by his exhibition at Altman Siegel gallery (through February 22). Denny printed out the company’s software patents, stacked them up, and carved into the brick-thick objects to turn them into sculptural reliefs that he hung on the walls. This might not make much sense if you haven’t read a recent Wired magazine article about Salesforce founder and co-CEO Marc Benioff’s use of such patents to help the company avoid paying certain taxes, a common strategy among enterprises of the kind. But all of it relates to a larger conversation happening in the United States right now around corporate behavior and private philanthropy—see Anand Giridharadas’s book Winners Take All: The Elite Charade of Changing the World and the recently formed tax-friendly group the Patriotic Millionaires—especially considering that Benioff and his wife, Lynne, gave $30 million to homelessness research last year.Denny’s exhibition brought tech-bro culture face-to-face with homelessness with all the subtlety of a Google van picking up employees in front of an encampment. Denny tricked out Patagonia-brand sleeping bags with dizzily patterned scarves that once belonged to Margaret Thatcher and displayed them as sculptures, upright on the gallery floor like sarcophagi.As San Francisco’s homeless are encased in sleeping bags, the city’s tech workers are encased in Nano Puff “power” vests—and Denny gave those too the Thatcher scarf treatment, showing them inside wall-mounted glass vitrines. (Denny bought the scarves last May from a Christie’s auction of Thatcher’s estate.) The bottom line seemed to be: if you want to know why so many people are sleeping on the street, you could do worse than look back to the particular breed of capitalism promoted by Thatcher, Reagan, and the Salesforces of the world.If Denny’s sleeping bags were meant explicitly to call to mind San Francisco’s homelessness problem, Damián Ortega’s exhibition at Adrian Rosenfeld (closed February 1) did so unintentionally, obliquely, and more powerfully through the Mexico City–based artist’s co-opting of discarded materials and references to urban development. Ortega’s latest sculptures represent a truly transformational use of found materials, in this case discarded cement bags made into papier-mâché hybrids for which he cross-bred animals with iconic buildings. The Empire State Building sprouted the head of a donkey (cocked ever so slightly to the side), the Chrysler Building, that of a rhinoceros (head straight, arms crossed). A famous apartment building by Moshe Safdie in Montreal became a menacing gorilla, while another apartment project, by Charles Correa in Bombay, took on aspects of a bull. All between six and ten feet tall, works like Gorilla building and Rhino tower loomed over viewers, filling gallery space that they seemed to have claimed as their own.The surfaces of Ortega’s sculptures betrayed their origins, showing the brand names on the bags used to package and ship cement mix. And using the by-products of architecture to represent some of the profession’s greatest feats made them all the more poignant. Iconic buildings are to be looked up at; bags—the stuff of landfills—end up being looked down on. Here, the bags assumed a certain dignity in their upcycled condition.Many homeless encampments in and around San Francisco are characterized by the inventive use of discarded materials to build structures that can house human beings. Last fall, when police dismantled an encampment in Oakland, they tore down an elaborate makeshift shelter built from wood scrap and tarps, and a spotlight created by strapping a lamp to a pole with a leather belt. By one count, there are some 17,000 homeless people in San Francisco, and their work with what artists tend to refer to as found objects is visible everywhere on the city’s streets.Encampments line the streets of the Presidio, right next to South of Market, where the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art happened to be exhibiting (through February 17) Richard Mosse’s three-channel 52-minute video Incoming (2017). Mosse used a thermal-imaging military camera to record, from a great distance, refugees from Africa and the Middle East living in encampments in Europe. Mosse’s camera could detect heat from a human body at a distance of 18 miles, and he used the surveillance camera out of necessity—there are restrictions on who can enter these areas. But the method of filming makes the work especially moving, as issues surrounding mass migration and homelessness are evoked in unique heat-generating individuals, each of whom has his or her own story contingent on all the systems in place around them.In the midst of the other artwork on show around San Francisco, it seemed as if someone should point out that SFMOMA moved to a brand-new building by starchitect Mario Buatta in South of Market in 1995, providing a world-class cultural destination just in time for the dot-com boom that brought in the first wave of start-ups and, later, the influx of tech jobs, the real-estate shortage, and the homelessness that define so much of the city today.A version of this article appears in the Spring 2020 issue of ARTnews, under the title “Bay Watch.”
ArtNews℗With Unrest Escalating Around the World, New York's Museum Shows Reflect a Tense Mood℗Alex Greenberger℗℗18/02/2020℗℗The defining work of the winter season in New York is a small painting of a nude female figure crouching in a black void, her body barely visible before a mysterious emanation—a white-hot corona, perhaps, or maybe the aftershock from an explosion. The painting was left unfinished when a bomb was dropped on artist Layla Al-Attar’s house in Iraq by the American military in 1993, killing her. It now serves as a kind of de facto memorial.Al-Attar’s Unfinished painting is one of more than 250 works in “Theater of Operations: The Gulf Wars 1991–2011” (on view through March 1), a timely exhibition at MoMA PS1 that channels anxieties past and present. Organized by PS1’s chief curator, Peter Eleey, and PS1 curator, Ruba Katrib, the exhibition surveys ways that American intervention in Iraq over two decades of war influenced art in and beyond the Middle East. And it resonated more than a little eerily when new threats of war mounted in the region this past January, this time with Iran.One of the show’s great discoveries is the dafatir, a type of working notebook that Iraqi artists created when they had limited access to other art materials. Examples by Mohammed Al Shammarey, Kareen Risan, Mahmoud Obaidi, and others are dense collages of ready-made text culled from newspapers, personal writing, figurative portraits, and frantic abstraction that were all the more potent for their humble format. While Iraqis experienced the war firsthand, Westerners watched it on screens. This phenomenon provided fodder for several artists in the exhibition. Cory Arcangel crafted a shocking piece called Bomb Iraq (2005), a computer game in which players click a mouse to drop warheads, and Rainer Ganahl made a series of paintings that intricately render pages from several news websites. A number of works deal with torture. For a haunting black-and-white print, Richard Serra fixed on an uncharacteristically blunt figure evoking widely published photos of abuses at Abu Ghraib prison; Tony Cokes’s powerful text-based videos address the deafeningly loud rap, metal, pop, and rock music that tortured inmates.Vija Celmins experienced war firsthand, though you might not know it from the coolly analytical paintings, sculptures, and works on paper at her survey exhibition at the Met Breuer (closed January 12). Celmins spent part of her childhood in oppressed countries during World War II—first, Soviet-occupied Latvia, then, Nazi-occupied Germany. With her low-key works from the ’60s, she returned again and again to her memories of conflict, often appropriating pictures of death and disaster in melancholy drawings rendered in seemingly infinite shades of gray. In one, fighter jets zoom across the sky on a TV screen that is itself set against an otherwise vacant sky; in another, a man on fire leaps from a burning car. These early pictures are muted and removed in ways that seem at odds with their subject, and they linger in the mind all the more as a result.Such pieces set the tone for the show, encouraging a dark reading of subsequent works. In a few of Celmins’s well-known skyscapes, light from dying stars streaked across the blackness that surrounded them, suggesting that where there is beauty, there may be violence.A long-overdue show for Zilia Sánchez at El Museo del Barrio (through March 22) takes up similar themes. For more than 50 years, Sánchez, a Puerto Rico–based artist who was born in Havana, has been making assertively sensual, shaped canvases that push abstract painting into the third dimension. Many of her works, rendered in cool blues and pallid grays, feature breast-like protuberances and vagina-like creases. But these are not passive images of femininity—they’re tensed-up visions of womanhood gone to war, with wooden armatures beneath the surface that seem to threaten to poke through the canvas. Many works bear titles alluding to strong-willed females of Greek mythology, such as the women of Troy.With the exception of one work—Represión (1998), a slab of cement with a grid of iron bars impressed atop it that the show’s curator, Vesela Sretenović, suggests may refer to the colonization of Puerto Rico—Sánchez has not made overtly political art. But much of the work she produced during the 1960s and ’70s, when second-wave feminism was taking hold around the world, evidences what may be a more radical undercurrent. Sánchez’s sole self-portrait—a 1954 image of herself as a nude Amazon warrior, her hair flying up around her, her eyes cast toward the viewer—seems to offer a clue as to her true intentions.At the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Kent Monkman, a Canadian First Nations artist of Cree and Irish ancestry, stares down the long-standing denigration of Indigenous peoples through two enormous paintings displayed in the Great Hall entryway (through April 9). Working in the tradition of artists like Kerry James Marshall, Monkman borrows some of the forms of iconic American history paintings and subverts them, inserting Indigenous characters—including his gender-fluid alter ego Miss Chief Eagle Testickle, who here wears nothing more than a silky red fabric and black stilettos—in place of the white figures who have historically populated such images.The litany of issues to which Monkman alludes—the legacies of slavery, the whiteness of art history, and the breakdown of gender norms, to name just a few—is heady and intense, and the pictures themselves are frenetic. Monkman excels at layering the present onto the past and vice versa. One of his paintings, Resurgence of the People (2019), plays on Emanuel Leutze’s iconic 1851 work Washington Crossing the Delaware (also on view at the Met)—but instead of depicting a channel lined with ice floes, Monkman transports the action to the middle of a choppy ocean, and in place of a snow-capped New Jersey shoreline visible in the distance, the artist offers a craggy isle peopled with white nationalists who stand by with assault rifles.Alan Michelson, a Mohawk member of the Six Nations of the Grand River, subverted suggestions of tradition in a Whitney Museum show (closed January 12) with videos and augmented-reality works that addressed the surveillance of Indigenous peoples and the exploitation of the land they live on. The best work wasn’t on the museum’s walls, however—it played out on visitors’ phones. In a 2019 AR piece produced with Steven Fragale titled Sapponckanikan (Tobacco Field), viewers could point their phones around the Whitney’s spacious ground floor and see digital tobacco plants sprouting everywhere—a reference to the crops that might have grown where the Whitney stands had the land not been seized from the Lenape people. Looking at the apparitions brought to mind recent protests at the Whitney, in which acknowledgments that the museum stands on Native land were a regular feature.Also at the Whitney was one of the season’s most exciting and chaotic shows: a mid-career survey of New York–based Rachel Harrison (closed January 12), whose beguiling, elusive, and idiosyncratic assemblages of everyday objects, photographs, papier-mâché, and more have made her perhaps the finest sculptor at work today.For her 1996 installation 1:1 (Wonton: John), Harrison scoured New York City for images of men named “John”—a John Stewart album cover, a painting of the critic John Perreault in the nude, a poster of Jon Bon Jovi, and so forth—and then placed them alongside 38 clay wontons of disparate color and size. She seemed to be punning art history by paying homage to various namesakes including Jasper Johns (one of her major inspirations—and the subject of a big Whitney show later this fall), and there may even be a feminist context around the concept of johns, as the clients of female sex workers are known.Some have accused Harrison of lacking coherent ideas, a criticism unfortunately warranted by a series of drawings in the show that placed crudely sketched versions of late pop star Amy Winehouse alongside female models appropriated from Martin Kippenberger, Pablo Picasso, and other sources. Why Amy Winehouse? Why art history? It was all a bit glib in a way that seemed to turn Winehouse’s death from alcohol poisoning into a punchline.But Harrison taps convincingly into a sense that too many ideas circulating all around us make it impossible to home in on any one of them. Art, she seems to propose, has the ability to suck it all in and spit it back out at the viewer in novel ways. It might not make sense, but it will open up new ways of understanding.Among Harrison’s finest works here was a 2006 sculpture that features a Hallmark greeting card rack adorned with fake peaches, a rotary phone, an image from a 1982 artwork by Hans Haacke (which itself appropriates Marcel Broodthaers), and a snow shovel, all in place of ostensible goods for sale. If Harrison is peddling anything, it’s concepts, with a welcome side of bawdy humor in its title: Nice Rack.A version of this article appears in the Spring 2020 issue of ARTnews, under the title “Uneasy Pieces.”
ArtNews℗In Los Angeles, a Thrilling and Unusual Triennial Considers Food in the Expanded Field℗Courtney Malick℗℗27/12/2019℗℗Art veterans know that the standard formula for a biennial or triennial is a sprawling show crammed with the newest and hottest emerging artists, plus a few established figures and a wildcard or two. Such events present themselves as the definitive statement on the moment, even as they often rely upon the recycling of well-trodden curatorial tropes. However, the second edition of Los Angeles's public-art triennial, CURRENT:LA FOOD, offered something distinctly different. It scattered works throughout the city, taking on the common yet compelling topic of food as its theme. Through all kinds of installations, performances and interactive projects, this unconventional triennial brought to the fore the many ways that food  effects everything else that occurs in life. It was a show that presented the kind of experimentation one more typically sees in a healthy artistic practice than an exhibition.Running for most of October, into early November, this second edition of CURRENT:LA presented public art in the most expansive sense—not as a sculpture in front of a museum that people pass by, but as something intimately interwoven into the city. With Asuka Hisa and Jamillah James of the local Institute of Contemporary Art as its lead curators, and the city's Department of Cultural Affairs as its main funder, the show involved interactive events at 16 public parks or spaces, and it brought viewers-turned-participants from all over the area, who almost always ended up with at least a little something to eat.It was an egalitarian affair, in other words, and importantly, one that felt welcoming to newcomers to contemporary art. It was also ambitious in scale, with 15 commissioned artists and 15 public programmers, including organizations like Across Our Kitchen Tables, which offers skill-sharing symposiums on food-based work; Los Angeles’s Sustainable Economic Enterprises, which partners with farmers markets, public schools, and CalFresh EBT (the state’s food stamp program), to help spread access to healthy and sustainably grown food to more and more people in LA; and a “super” market called SÜPRSEED, whose self-described aim is to “end America’s ‘food apartheid.’”With so many sites, artists, and programmers participating, summing it all up is a tall task, but a few highlights can show the interconnected and varied perspectives that were on view, and how they dealt with critical questions and conditions facing both California and the United States. Labor was central to the show, and its links to immigration, identity, history, nutrition, climate, and sustainability came out in a number of different ways from project to project.The artistic collaborative Nonfood, an algae-based product company spearheaded by artist Sean Raspet and writer and researcher Lucy Chinen, installed an algae bioreactor on the grounds of an out-of-the-way Westside ranch. Here visitors could see the environmentally sustainable crop being farmed as it doubled in size every 24 hours. At certain events participants could harvest some of their own, attend edible workshops where participants learned to substitute algae and other sustainable plant-based proteins into familiar recipes, and co-mingle at a seed-themed educational picnic.Also looking at sustainability concerns, but with an entirely different approach, were Carolyn Pennypacker and Annie Gimas, who used a public park in Van Nuys for a collaborative performance titled ALL AGAIN. The piece incorporated choral hymns, group choreography, found object installations made of aging fruit, and sculptural columns and baskets made of plaster to bring an enhanced and poetic awareness of the inevitable waste inherent within consumption. Like several of the projects in CURRENT:LA FOOD, it was a reoccurring performance that also provided a unique opportunity to use its site as an ongoing community composting hub that will likely continue long after the triennial.Other pieces took a more historical approach, by touching on fields like geology and agriculture, as in the highly interactive work titled Mussel Beach, by the British duo Cooking Sections. Having been assigned Venice Beach as their point of intervention, the artists homed in on the famed weight-lifting area Muscle Beach. While researching its past, they learned that the Venice marina has long been a critical area for a particular California mussel species that is now seriously threatened due to longstanding environmental degradation. The duo carved out a route for their viewers that allowed them to see and experience all of the quintessential features of the coastal area. Retooling the now ubiquitous headsets offered at large museums for easy walk-along listening, Cooking Sections drafted an audio track to guide viewers through the beach, piers, boardwalk, skate park, workout areas, and eventually the rocky cliffs that the mussels cling to as they filter seawater. While they enjoyed the sea breeze and watched the locals buff up, an almost-robotic-sounding female voice asked its listeners to consider their own muscles and their surroundings, and pointed out the sights, adding in historical and agricultural facts where relevant. There was a hidden symmetry here, with the mussels exercising their valves to ingest nutrients and filter out pollutants and plastics, while the bodybuilders and “modders” were pumping iron and binging on green smoothies and protein shakes. That culinary touch inspired the artists to offer visitors mussel tacos and mussel-infused shakes that were lightly briny, frothy concoctions that straddled the ever-so-popular divide between savory and sweet.Still other artists took the food brief to the public in unusual and inventive ways. Nancy Lupo installed a series of 16 benches titled Open Mouth, whose 32 rounded elements reference the number of an adult’s teeth. Open Mouth enveloped the entryways and exits of part of the bustling Pershing Square in downtown L.A. and used both the border created by the configuration of the benches and the activated space therein to consider the symbolic metabolism of the city, brought to life through staged performances and readings.Similarly sculptural was --- Imperishable, Jazmin Urrea’s Judd-esque clear plinth structures filled with crushed-up dark red Flamin’ Hot Cheeto dust that smeared and crackled as it continued to soak up the sun’s rays throughout the duration of the exhibition.Not everything took such an oblique approach, though. For New Shores: The Future Dialogue Between Two Homelands, which was set in the centrally located Barnsdall Park in East Hollywood, Max La Rivière-Hedrick and Julio César Morales produced a weekly series of evening picnic gatherings that featured foods prepared on different themes and with ethnic histories that celebrate those immigrant communities that thrive in the neighborhood, including Korean, Armenian, Thai, and Mexican. The artists also invited special guests to share readings, poetry, music, screenings, and performances whose underpinnings further tied food to the cultural narratives woven into migration.Why do a food triennial now, and why in L.A.? The world is getting fuller, and hotter, and we are seeing more droughts, fires, and floods that directly threaten crops and livestock, and that imbue individual food choices with political concerns. The city felt like an ideal place for it. Long stereotyped as the land of Del Taco and In & Out, it is home to the ever-flourishing cuisines of countless immigrant communities, and it has a burgeoning food scene at seemingly every price point. As for CURRENT:LA FOOD’s own finances, it appeared to be light on its feet—making a lot out of a little. There were none of the big-budget spectacles that so often dominate these events. It showed how a major exhibition like a triennial can function as something other than a donor-and-collector-oriented capitalist venture. Instead of a hulking display intent on minting markets for new artists, it operated in a fleeting, experiential mode, asking people to get together, to talk, and to eat.
ArtNews℗The Year in, and Beyond, New York’s Galleries—Plus a Top 10 from All Over℗Andrew Russeth℗℗10/12/2019℗℗“Art of the City” is a weekly column by Andrew Russeth that runs every Tuesday.On Sunday afternoon, a delivery man biking through Tribeca turned onto Cortlandt Alley and slammed his breaks. Hundreds of people were blocking his way, and he looked baffled. Artists Space, the stalwart New York alternative space, had just opened its new home there, and the people were on hand for a performance by Ei Arakawa—a characteristically winning, absurd one called WeWork Babies, which involved, among other actions, participants tossing lifelike baby dolls through the air. They moved out of the bicyclist’s way, and he cruised on.Change is afoot in the Triangle Below Canal. This was the year that a critical mass of galleries—Canada, James Cohan, Andrew Kreps, and more—decamped from other longtime art districts—mainly far west Chelsea—to the neighborhood, where a handful of veteran dealers and a few young outfits began setting up shop a couple years ago. A lively art enclave in the 1970s, Tribeca has become one once again, though few artists now call the pricey area home.Speaking of real estate, 2019 was also a year of outsized, hyper-ambitious developments on Manhattan’s cultural scene. The $25 billion luxury monstrosity that is Hudson Yards finally opened on the West Side, with Thomas Heatherwick’s menacing Vessel at its center and Diller Scofidio + Renfro’s vapid Shed at its edge. Pace Gallery unveiled a $100 million-plus tower in Chelsea, and Hauser & Wirth and David Zwirner are mid-construction on their own Chelsea art palaces. Collectors Peter M. Brant and J. Tomilson Hill opened private museums, the latter hosting one of the year’s best shows—a bracing arrangement of sculptures by Los Angeles conceptualist Charles Ray and Renaissance and Baroque ones, curated by Ray himself.The biggest news for art types, of course, was the new Museum of Modern Art, which unveiled its sumptuous $450 million expansion with a heartening rehang of its collection, filled with gutsy moments and missed opportunities. With regular rotations planned, it’ll take more than a year to get a full sense of its new agenda, but it’s taken a giant step forward. (A bonus: the fried chicken at the new 6th-floor cafe, which houses rollicking new works by Kerstin Brätsch.) Now the countdown is on for the new Studio Museum in Harlem, slated for 2022.Before delving into a year-end top 10 of favorites, a few notes from the field on some events that didn’t quite make such a short list. Highlights included Matt Copson’s fearsome laser light show at Reena Spaulings, Raúl de Nieves’s latest sculptural fantasia at Company, Ragen Moss’s sterling debut of hanging constructions at Bridget Donahue, Nolan Simon’s entrancingly weird paintings at 47 Canal, and Paul Chan’s honing of his pneumatic sculptures at Greene Naftali.On the group show front, Randy Kennedy, formerly a New York Times arts reporter and now publishing chief at Hauser & Wirth, delivered a fascinating tour of outlaw America in the form of “Jack Black’s America” at Fortnight Institute. Essex Street (working with John Keith Russell Antiques) marshalled a toothsome pairing of Shaker furniture and contemporary art (it’s still on view: don’t miss it), and Petzel presented the heady “Strategic Vandalism: The Legacy of Asger Jorn’s Modification Paintings, which was curated by Axel Heil and Roberto Ohrt and stuffed with masterpieces of defacement, assisted readymades, and détournement.As for the big blockbusters, they were in generally fine form: there was a New York–heavy cast of characters in the admirably of-the-moment Venice Biennale, a Whitney Biennial that ignited long-overdue conversations about cultural patronage and the lack of diversity in art criticism, and a new Performa, the biennial devoted to live work, which very strong, offering everything from a touching treatise on preteen life by Tarik Kiswanson to a New Age bacchanal by Korakrit Arunanondchai, Boychild, and Alex Gvojic.Last but not least: two of today’s old masters were resplendent: Alex Katz’s hot streak continued in his mysterious, shadow-filled sylvan landscapes at Gavin Brown’s Enterprise, and Jasper Johns delivered stunning new paintings—very dark, very funny ones—at Matthew Marks.This has been, to be sure, a long year. It began with the federal government shutdown that ended just in time to catch the majestic Bill Traylor retrospective at the Smithsonian American Art Museum. It seems likely to conclude with the President’s impeachment. If you make the trip to the capital to catch the Senate trial, visit former Manhattan dealer Todd von Ammon's space, which opened with a Vegas-casino-worthy display of bewitching neons and digital art by Tabor Robak.But enough! To the list.10. "Andra Ursuta: Nobodies" at Ramiken, BrooklynThere are few artists operating at such a high level, consistently, as Andra Ursuta. Every show seems to involve a new idea, or three, that is adventurous, alluring, and smoldering with potential. This outing showcases (it’s still open!) cast-glass sculptures—hybrid, abstract self-portraits in which her body is held in place by, or consumed by, plastic bottles, bondage wear, and the like.9. “Win McCarthy: Apartment Life” at Svetlana, New YorkA box of Cheerios, some empty Poland Spring bottles, and a bottle of Heinz yellow mustard with its top flipped open were scattered about. Glass constructions sat here and there, suggesting condo towers (when vertical) or beds. A bunch of keys rested atop a blanket. Opening in the dead of winter, Win McCarthy’s display conjured a city that was threadbare and on edge. It was scatter art about being scattered—about barely holding on. One unforgettable sculpture was a glass head with a large stick of butter in its mouth.8. “Harry Fonesca: The Art of Living” at the Eiteljorg Museum of American Indians and Western Art, IndianapolisThe wily, indefatigable painter Harry Fonseca (Maidu/Nisenan, Portuguese, Hawaiian, 1946–2006) was shown in peak form in this career survey organized by Matthew Ryan Smith. The best work? That’s impossible to pick amid such an energetic cast of paintings, but ranking up there has to be the artist in his trademark Coyote guise, sporting a full tuxedo while sitting at a grand piano. He is banging the keys, and flames are spewing from its body. Irresistible.7. “Basquiat’s ‘Defacement’: The Untold Story” at the Guggenheim Museum, New YorkIn 2016, at the Williams College Museum of Art, Chaedria LaBouvier presented a series of programs around Jean-Michel Basquiat’s 1983 painting Defacement (The Death of Michael Stewart), which addresses the death of that young artist in police custody. Her expansive follow-up added works about Stewart by Keith Haring, David Hammons, and many more, illuminating an event with aching relevance. It was a show about art recording history in real time, and galvanizing action. That’s an inspiring example in a trying year. Stewart’s own abstract drawings—delicate, nuanced, and the worst word, promising—were the quiet stars.6. “Brian Belott’s RHODASCOPE: Scribbles, Smears, and the Universal Language of Children According to Rhoda Kellogg” at San Francisco City HallFor decades, Rhoda Kellogg (1898–1987) taught art to nursery school students in San Francisco, studying with seemingly endless curiosity how they developed as artists. In the process, she amassed more than 2 million drawings by them, a sliver of which went on view in this joyous, sprawling look at her life’s work, put together by artist Brian Belott, who's a Kellogg devotee (and also showed his copies of students' paintings), with Jordan Stein and Lindsey White. It would have been a thrill anywhere, but the seat of government felt perfect, rightly honoring children and their heroic teacher.5. Hadi Fallahpisheh at Tramps, New YorkA gut punch of a show, Hadi Fallahpisheh’s solo outing at Tramps delivered an exceedingly rare message: something new is afoot. The artist has been making uproarious and sometimes frightening cartoon drawings using photographic materials in his darkroom—a mouse behind bars, a man in bed (or a crib). Shown together, they conjure a topsy-turvy and troubled world that feels uncomfortably familiar.4. “Olga Balema: brain damage” at Bridge Donahue, New YorkDescribing Olga Balema’s almost-invisible sculptures—elastic bands, painted and strung in idiosyncratic arrangements near the floor—one could rattle off references like Richard Tuttle’s scrappy constructions, Fred Sandback’s strings, Alan Shields’s hippie installations, and Eva Hesse’s nets, but they handily elude any easy distillation. They shock and seduce, while suggesting circuit boards or—just maybe, in a nod to the show’s title—neural networks: vast, intricate systems. It was a show to make you giddy with anticipation for the next one.3. Gretchen Bender at Red Bull Arts New YorkIt’s baffling that a space funded by an energy-drink company was the institution revisiting the razor-sharp work of Pictures-era artist Gretchen Bender and not, say, a major museum or kunsthalle. But let’s just be happy they did it. The show, curated by Max Wolf, portrayed Bender, who died in 2004, as an unrivaled prophet of the all-encompassing media hellscape that was to come.2. “She Persists: A Century of Women Artists in New York” at Gracie Mansion, New YorkDespite trying his level best, there will be no President Bill de Blasio in the White House in 2020, but here’s hoping First Lady Chirlane McCray gets a chance to do some arts programming at the federal level very soon. She’s been pushing bold arts events at the first family’s official residence, where “She Persists,” which was organized by Jessica Bell Brown, brought together scores of works made by women in the city over the past century, from Alice Neel to Betty Parsons to Carmen Herrera. Make it an annual event!1. Nicholas Buffon at Poets House, New YorkA panegyric to New York, to more than 100 years of LGBTQ history, and to a life lived in art, Nicholas Buffon’s solo show—a miniature survey of sorts—includes wry paintings and prints of himself about town, as well as the sturdy little models of landmarks (Stonewall, B&H Dairy, Julius’) that are his trademark. Even the wall labels sing, with tidbits of city lore and the odd tourist tip. It is open through December 28. Bring a friend. Fall in love.
ArtNews℗Monet Spent a Lifetime Immersed in Nature. With Masterpieces and Little-Known Works, Superb Denver Show Charts His Journeys℗Phyllis Tuchman℗℗09/12/2019℗℗What’s that you’re asking? Another Monet show? While the Denver Art Museum is billing its current exhibition, “Claude Monet: The Truth of Nature," as “the most comprehensive U.S. exhibition of Monet’s paintings in more than two decades,” myriad aspects of this protean Impressionist’s body of work have been surveyed in both broad strokes and minute detail over the past 20 years. You need more than two hands to count these presentations. They include Monet at Vétheuil: The Turning Point; Monet in Normandy; Monet: The Seine and the Sea; Monet and the Seine: Impressions of a River; Monet in Giverny: Landscapes of Reflection; Monet and the Mediterranean; Monet’s London: Artists’ Reflections on the Thames; Monet and Camille: Impressionist Portraits of His Wife; Monet and His Friends; Monet and the Birth of Impressionism; Monet: The Early Years; Monet: A Bridge to Modernity; Monet: Light, Shadow, and Reflection; Monet’s Impression: Sunrise, The Biography of a Painting; The Unknown Monet: Pastels and Drawings; and Monet: The Late Years. Whew!As it is, curators have selected—and discussed in their respective catalogues—Monet’s art in ways that reflect a constantly evolving discourse. Some shows have stressed biography; others, his originality. His work has been approached formally, historically, philosophically. Even a touch of social consciousness has entered the picture: born in 1840 to a middle-class Parisian family, Monet was a poor, struggling artist who had difficulty keeping food on the table but ended up as a dear friend of the prime minister of France and the owner of a vast estate that employed full-time gardeners and an accomplished chef.Because Monet, after a certain point, made works in series, you’d think it would be relatively easy to borrow his pictures. It isn’t. Some institutions won’t lend so as not to disappoint visitors expecting to find their favorites on view. And those willing to let other museums borrow their Impressionist treasures need to let their well-traveled works of art rest from time to time. With courage and conviction, Denver—and its co-presenter, the Museum Barberini in Potsdam, Germany, where the show travels next, after it closes on February 2—sought out unfamiliar, top-notch Monets for their extensive survey of landscapes and urban views made across seven decades. Rather than the usual suspects, you’ll find lots of canvases from private collections as well as places as far-flung as Australia, Japan, Brazil, and Scotland.If someone mentions Monet, there’s a good chance you picture in your mind’s eye either the radiant gardens in Giverny that the artist painted during the last quarter of his long life or the bustling scenes he depicted in and around Paris early in his career. While the Denver show overlaps somewhat with “Claude Monet: Seasons and Moments,” the landmark exhibition MoMA curator William C. Seitz mounted in 1960, it stresses much more the artist’s peripatetic ways. From his home base—first, in Paris; later, in Vétheuil; and eventually, Giverny—the Impressionist traveled to a wide range of locales where he painted distinctive canvases. This survey includes pictures executed in the Netherlands, Le Havre, Varengeville, Norway, Belle-Île, L’Étretat, Antibes, Rouen, London, and Venice. However, as you wander among the various sites depicted in different seasons and a variety of weather conditions, you won’t get lost. The walls in each section change colors as you wind your way around the two floors of the show, moving from site to site. (It was organized by DAM chief curator Angelica Daneo, director Christoph Heinrich, and Barberini director Ortrud Westheider.)Monet skillfully portrayed the ineffable and the momentary. Scuttering clouds cross clear blue skies; sunlight is reflected in the blue waters of Venetian canals and French rivers. Steam rises from boats and trains. London bridges are cloaked in pea-soup fog; and ice floes breaking apart in Vétheuil evince the record-breaking cold of winter 1880. These days, time-based art—made via computer, video, or performance—is front and center in the art world. But more than a century ago, Monet was constantly recording temporal events using traditional means.The first section of the show offers gallerygoers several surprises. For starters, the curators have reunited canvases of the same Norman scene rendered in 1858 by Monet’s mentor, Eugene Boudin, and his student, who was 16 years younger. Monet later recalled, “If I became a painter, it is to Eugene Boudin that I owe the fact.” While Boudin’s landscape is accomplished, it verges on the generic. Long, lingering clouds in the blue sky emphasize the horizontality of the work; the treetops echo a more prominent green bush. Monet’s blue sky is more expansive and has fewer and fluffier clouds; the trunks of his tall trees in the background create a vertical rhythm that’s underscored by their reflection in the water in the foreground.An unfamiliar night scene of the harbor in Le Havre, never before exhibited in the United States, occupies a nearby wall. It’s the same setting as Impression: Sunrise (1872), the Monet work that gave the movement its name. In this haunting piece, a series of circular dots create a pronounced band across the painting; magically, the lights also exist as shimmering reflections in the water. Given the rarity of the artist’s portraying the world after dark, the view is a lovely, unexpected encounter.Since few of the paintings feature figures, it’s fairly easy to recognize how Monet selected his destinations. Not surprisingly, he often went to places where water was part of the scene. He depicted water as calm, turbulent, a narrow stream, a winding canal, a broad river, in winter and summer, a site in which to swim, row a boat, or even ice skate. He painted masterpieces in places both urban and rustic.In Antibes, Monet foregrounded palm trees with snow-capped mountains in the distance. As for architectural subjects, he painted a series featuring an echt Gothic cathedral in Rouen; later, Venetian palazzos; and later still, the Gothic revival Houses of Parliament in London. At the end of his life, he portrayed his Japanese garden, while other French artists were being inspired by Japanese prints.As you move through the show, there’s a wonderful balance between subject matter and the ways it’s rendered. But at a pivotal moment during his late years, pure aesthetics take over. Swirling brushstrokes, dabs of paint, and remarkable color choices were melded much more in the service of abstraction. Monet flirts with the properties of nonobjective art. It’s a thrill to watch the artist in the 1920s, now an octogenarian, harness all the powers of his paint box. At 86, he would die, in 1926. As you become immersed in enthralling, dramatic views of the artist’s Japanese bridge, rose arches, peonies, and countless water lilies, you realize that “Claude Monet: The Truth of Nature” is telling the story of a long life lived to the fullest.
ArtNews℗Hans Haacke's Art Has Long Targeted Museums. A Career Retrospective Tests Its Potency Today.℗Alex Greenberger℗℗02/12/2019℗℗Édouard Manet’s Bunch of Asparagus (1880) is a winsome little painting of a pile of the vegetables on a bed of greens. It is one of the very greatest still lifes in art history (the brushwork on those greens!), and certainly one of Manet’s most alluring pictures. It is also a painting connected to the Nazis.In 1974, artist Hans Haacke undertook the task of tracing the painting’s history, charting each time it changed hands since it was made in 1880 for the French art collector Charles Ephrussi for just 800 francs. Haacke’s research culminated in a revelation: the painting had passed through the hands of Deutsche Bank chairman Hermann Josef Abs, who had acted as a financial adviser to Nazi officials. The painting was on long-term loan to the Wallraf-Richartz Museum in Cologne, Germany. Haacke proposed showing a work about the history of the Manet canvas at the institution, which had invited him to participate in an exhibition held in celebration of its 150th anniversary. The museum rejected his project.That is far from the only Haacke work that has not made it on view as he planned. Some museum officials seem to be afraid of Haacke, and their fear is not misplaced. Over the past five decades, Haacke has highlighted how institutions cannot be separated from unfettered capitalism, toxic ideologies, and power imbalances around the world. At one point, this was taboo material. Now, it is commonplace, the stuff of conversations in boardrooms and activist meetings. But the one-time edginess of Haacke’s art may be why Americans have not had the opportunity to witness a proper Haacke survey in more than 30 years.Thankfully, the New Museum in New York is rectifying this situation, mounting the first proper Haacke museum retrospective in the U.S. since it last had the good sense to do one, in 1986. Curated by Gary Carrion-Murayari and Massimiliano Gioni, this incisive show comes at a crucial moment. A growing mass of workers and activists are now demanding that institutions take accountability for their connections to racism, sexism, ableism, colonialism, fascism, and a host of other issues, and calling on certain board members to be removed because of their business dealings. Museums are also being accused of having misplaced priorities, undertaking renovations worth millions instead of paying workers fairly, and pushing out historically oppressed communities through expansion projects. Protestors have called on directors to be more transparent about their activities. Haacke has been awaiting this moment.The New Museum show makes a powerful case that Haacke’s work is not just the stuff of Art History 101 courses—its subject matter is deeply relevant, and the art on view has a lot to teach us. Take On Social Grease (1975), a series of magnesium plates, each of them bearing the words of a philanthropist-magnate engraved into it. “EXXON’s support of the arts serves the arts as a social lubricant,” one plate reads, quoting Robert Kingsley, a cultural manager at the oil company. Seen from afar, Kingsley’s words recede into their aluminum backgrounds—the plates become Minimalist objects that seem politics-free, even inoffensive. This is ideal for the museums’ goals, Haacke hints. The slicker the surface, the better.In fact, Haacke, a pioneer of what became known as institutional critique, had his roots in Minimalist art. A superb gallery in the new survey is given over to Haacke’s early ever-changing sculptures from the ’60s. In one, Haacke lets condensation form inside a Plexiglas cube. In another, an electrical current travels down a 22-foot-long glass pipe, occasionally hissing as it slowly glides across the gallery’s floor. At a glance, these works can seem banal. But Haacke is up to something fascinating. He’s creating closed-circuit loops—literal ecosystems in which matter is transmitted between poles, almost in the same way people exchange data and ideas. They’re more than just science experiments, in other words—they’re conceptual works about how disparate elements influence one another.These works aren’t that different from On Social Grease, really—as his career as progressed, Haacke has simply shifted his interest from scientific systems to the System, the larger web of power relations that makes moving money (and power) around the world possible. A number of installations at the New Museum even reflect this visually, through networks of images and words. Their texts are rife with arrows, data points, and numbers—a lot of reading is required.Don’t come expecting beauty. Haacke’s work has a hauteur to it because of its reliance on ideas over aesthetics, and he is a conceptualist at heart. His weakest works actually tend to come when he tries to create something visually engaging. More recently, Haacke has had a tendency to create overcooked statements about the state of America, dealing in well-worn tropes like torn-up stars and stripes and distressed images of white-bread suburbia. One work in this vein—a new installation called Make Mar-a-Lago Great Again (2019), in which Donald Trump’s tweets are displayed on an upturned monitor alongside Statue of Liberty bobblehads and a golf club—is unfortunately placed front and center, in the museum’s lobby. It is thuddingly obvious.Peculiarly, some of his older works feel more contemporary than his new ones. MetroMobilitan (1985) is an installation that calls out the Metropolitan Museum of Art for accepting money from Mobil, which provided funding to South African police during Apartheid. “Total denial of supplies to the police and military forces of a host country is hardly consistent with an image of responsible citizen in that country,” one banner included in the installation reads, quoting corporate literature. This is eerily similar to signs brought by protestors to the Whitney Museum earlier this year, when activists demanded the resignation of Warren B. Kanders, then the vice chair of museum’s board, following reports that he owns a defense manufacturing company that produces tear-gas canisters used against migrants and protestors around the world. (Kanders capitulated to activists in July.)Like any activist aiming to have sway, Haacke has had to walk a fine line in terms of his own power and complicity. His practice, in one sense, exemplifies that old American Express slogan: “Membership has its benefits.” He is a card-carrying art-world member, with a Chelsea gallery and a long tenure as an admired professor. At the same time, he has been persistent in taking audacious risks, both political and aesthetic. If some of his work has lost its change, it may simply be because its targets have vanished into history books. His enduring presence on the scene, his zest for the next cause, is inspiring. Just a month before the show opened, the museum’s newly formed union voted to authorize a strike amid demands for a new wage structure. Many observers wondered if the artist would address the issue; in the end, the New Museum came to an agreement with its workers, potentially avoiding becoming Haacke’s latest victim.When he is at his best, Haacke avoids any straightforward political polemics. He probes power, and aims to ascertain public opinion, which alone is often enough rile up gatekeepers. Since the 1970s, he’s polled visitors about their political views in his art. At the Museum of Modern Art in 1970, he asked visitors about their thoughts regarding MoMA trustee and New York governor David Rockefeller’s support for Richard Nixon and his interventions in Vietnam. (The majority of the 37,000 who cast ballots decried it.) After MoMA Poll, Haacke didn’t show another work at the museum for 29 years. In the New Museum show’s catalogue, the curators ask for his feeling about this. Haacke responds: “I am not sorry.”