ArtReview℗‘Our People Were There Too’: on Sathnam Sanghera’s ‘Empireland’℗Mark Rappolt℗Book Review℗22/03/2021℗The Times journalist’s new book examines how contemporary Britain remains shaped by the legacy of colonialism, and how it is acknowledged today℗Empireland sets out to measure to what extent contemporary Britain remains shaped by the legacies of Empire and colonialism, and to what extent that influence is acknowledged in Britain today. The answer to the second is simple: generally speaking, it isn’t. Despite, as Sathnam Sanghera points out, recent waves of statue-toppling, institutional renaming and corporate apologies in the UK. The answer to the first is more complex. Sanghera, a Cambridge-educated journalist of Sikh Punjabi heritage born in Wolverhampton, concedes that he is approaching his subject – surprisingly given his ethnic background; unsurprisingly given his British education – as something of a novice. For large parts of the book this allows him to project himself as a sort of everyman offering up a reader’s digest of colonial history (a synthesis of sources readily available, as the author points out, to those who chose to look for them) and the various atrocities (slavery included) it encompasses. Yet what makes this book truly interesting – and without doubt allows the author to develop a more complex understanding of the effects of Empire on Britain today than his everyman persona would suggest – is Sanghera’s inclusion, and seemingly honest assessment, of his personal position, as a British Sikh, within all this. To put it very crudely, he has one foot in each of the camps of coloniser and colonised. Proud of being British, yet subject to a fair degree of ‘Paki bashing’. ‘I can’t help feeling that I’m on a similar journey [to that undertaken by India’s Harrow- and Cambridge-educated first prime-minister, Jawaharlal Nehru], that in embarking on this project I’m making an effort to decolonise myself,’ Sanghera confesses. So while Empireland traces the ‘toxic mixture of nostalgia and amnesia’ that allows the rhetoric and psychology of the imperial British mind, its distrust of experts and cleverness, its attitude of exceptionalism and, of course, its blindness to its enduring racism (both casual and institutional) to persist, in some ways unchanged since the Empire’s heyday (and which has led, in Sanghera’s view, to Brexit, among other things), it doesn’t shy away from examining the extent to which some colonised peoples (Sikhs among them) collaborated with their colonisers, or enabled the Empire, casually at times, to expand. It takes a measured approach in its analysis of the economic benefits Britain gained from its colonies. And attempts to untangle actions of Empire that were to one degree a result of unchecked individual impulses and to another the result of structural imperatives. Amid all this, Sanghera reserves his biggest critique for Britain’s education system, which neither incorporates any serious study of Britain’s imperial past, nor reflects the inclusive, multiracial society that Britain today so likes to project. ‘The most serious and painful omission of my education was that during the years of being taught about world wars and sitting through endless remembrance services, no one cared to tell us, a radically diverse student body, that our people were there too,’ the author asserts while reflecting on his time at Wolverhampton Grammar School. Indeed, had he been made aware of the long history of ethnic minorities who were present and active in Britain’s social and political life before and during the centuries of Empire, Sanghera speculates, ‘instead of being fed the idea that my family and I were some kind of novel social experiment, interlopers in a white country, it would have made a huge difference to my sense of belonging’. And perhaps this point is key to Empireland: a serious reflection on Britain’s actions and relations to Empire might end up being an effective way of building things up as well as tearing things down.
ArtReview℗Yoo Youngkuk’s Pioneering Vision of Abstraction℗Andy St. Louis℗Book Review℗18/03/2021℗A new monograph on the Korean painter foregrounds his knack for distilling landscape into fluid visual meditations℗In ancient times, the world was thought to be made up of four elements – earth, air, water and fire – that constituted all matter. Aristotle, however, posited the existence of a fifth element: a sublime and perfect substance considered as the embodiment of pure form. The notion of a quinta essentia (fifth element) persisted through the centuries, giving rise to the modern term ‘quintessence’ as a shorthand for the indelible and intrinsic spirit within all things. A new monograph on Korean abstract painter Yoo Youngkuk (1916–2002) asserts this keyword as a framework for contemplating the artist’s keen aesthetic sensibility, granting long-awaited international recognition to an early adopter of modernism and influential figure in postwar Korean art. Boasting 213 colour plates that span the entirety of Yoo’s career as well as three new critical essays and a detailed chronology documenting his life and work, this hefty volume foregrounds Yoo’s pioneering vision of abstraction, his knack for distilling the spirit of the Korean landscape into fluid visual meditations and his visceral connection to the rugged terrain of his country. ‘The mountain is not in front of me but inside of me,’ reads a quote on the book’s back cover, a fitting aphorism for the oneness of subject and self manifested in Yoo’s extraordinary oeuvre. Born in the hinterlands of Uljin, South Korea, Yoo departed his homeland at the age of nineteen to attend art university in Tokyo, where he explored geometric abstraction in his painting practice and played an active role in Japan’s burgeoning avant-garde scene. Yoo returned to Korea in 1943, ceased his artistic activities and began operating a fishing boat owned by his father. After Korea’s liberation from Japanese colonial occupation, in 1945, he briefly took up a teaching post at Seoul National University; however, with the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, Yoo again made his way back to Uljin and took over his family’s soju distillery as a way of making ends meet during the lean wartime years. It wasn’t until after the war that Yoo resumed painting in earnest, at which point the flat angular planes of colour that had characterised his early works gave way to organic forms and atmospheric spatial compositions, bespeaking a newfound engagement with the Korean landscape as his primary subject matter. In time, he settled on a restrained visual vocabulary of triangles and circles – motifs representing mountains and the sun – rendered in vibrant hues, which he arranged into harmonious amalgamations of colour and form. It was an aesthetic that would define Yoo’s practice for the rest of his career, never straying from the elemental abstraction that imbued his landscapes with a transcendental purity rarely matched in the realm of modern Korean art. Quintessence furnishes readers with ample biographical context for Yoo’s oeuvre, thanks to the three interpretive essays. Gabriel Ritter (Head of Contemporary Art, Minneapolis Institute of Art) situates Yoo in the historical milieu of interwar Japan and the influence of his mentor Murai Masanari, before focusing on Yoo’s turn towards nature and the development of his signature style in the latter part of his career. While Ritter’s writing largely hews to the facts, Inhye Kim (curator, MMCA Korea) offers a psychological analysis of the underlying motivations that informed Yoo’s personal evolution from childhood until old age, asserting his lifelong pursuit of ‘absolute freedom’ as a defining characteristic of his distinctive painting practice. A lengthy text by Bartomeu Marí (director, Museo de Arte de Lima, Peru; former director, MMCA Korea) postulates that Yoo’s unwavering artistic conviction arose in response to shifting cultural paradigms that he encountered in his lifetime – the chaos of forced modernity during the Japanese colonial period, dire poverty and destruction wreaked by the Korean War and ideological repression of authoritarian rule in Korea during the height of Yoo’s career – and awakened his belief in building a better world, with the constancy and resilience of his country’s vast mountain ranges as a beacon of stability amid the caprices of modern existence. 
ArtReview℗The Universe Will Not Expand Forever: Agustín Fernández Mallo, ‘The Things We’ve Seen’℗David Terrien℗Book Review℗18/03/2021℗Dreamlike narration and associations build in intensity, in the Spanish writer’s novel℗‘Reality is eminently disordered. We never perceive things in their correct order, which means that when we’re talking or writing, we don’t keep to the correct temporal sequence either.’ This uncontroversial statement, buried towards the back of a 484-page novel, lies at the heart of Spanish writer Agustín Fernández Mallo’s project in The Things We’ve Seen. Fernández Mallo, the de facto leading light of an avant-garde literary movement known in Spain as the Nocilla Generation (so-called for the author’s own Nocilla Trilogy, 2015–19), writes here in a manner that variously recalls, references, evokes and invokes the writings, aesthetics and thinking of W.G. Sebald, Carl Hiaasen, Louis-Ferdinand Céline, Georges Perec, Octavio Paz, Ben Lerner, Jeffrey Eugenides, Jorge Luis Borges, Edward Hopper, Giorgio De Chirico and many others, and yet that remains entirely his own in its final assembly and presentation. ‘Life’, the statement continues, ‘is an nth degree plane crash, life is a great catastrophe, the definitive accident, and our attempts to recount it are shot through with that very same disorderedness.’ Disorder asserts itself from the start, when the story’s unnamed narrator, a writer, decides not to return home following his participation in a conference on the topic of ‘Net-Thinking’, held on an otherwise unoccupied island off the coast of northern Spain, in 2014. Alone, cut off from the world, he delves into the island’s history as the site of a prison camp during the Spanish Civil War via documents he discovers on a fleet of vintage PCs. Stories within the stories: a prisoner’s testimony of friendship with a guard; the privations suffered by older inmates; the solace of contraband poems by Federico García Lorca; a baker who makes pregnant-dog-shaped biscuits with breast milk; an unidentified droning noise that sounds like pure love; and a text message on the narrator’s out-of-coverage mobile phone that reads, ‘It’s a mistake to take the things we’ve seen as a given’. (This last, we are told, is a line from the Galician poet Carlos Oroza.) Careering towards what looks like the narrator’s nervous breakdown, Part I ends with his admission that he has no memory of the year that follows. Then the story – the stories – really pick up, expand, circle: we’re in New York now, it’s 2015, and the narrator is at a loss as to how he got there. He attends a screening of art films in Red Hook and meets a woman named Skyler, who is in possession of images from the prison camp in Galicia, which leads in turn to a baker on the Lower East Side known for his pregnant-dog-shaped cookies. While watching the eternal churn of rubbish in the East River, he is approached by a man presenting himself as Salvador Dalí, who tells a story about leporine starvation – death by pure protein, rabbits in this case. We learn about an exchange of energy called the Compton Effect, the endlessly burning fires of Africa, New York’s falcon population, the way that aimless wandering eventually resolves into a figure eight, a friendship with a Uruguayan named Rodolfo, who dies suddenly, and who becomes the pretext for a trip to South America. Dreamlike narration and associations build in intensity, fed by echoes of earlier conversations and details, an increasingly manic and disordered delivery, another nervous breakdown. The universe will not expand forever. And yet we are less than halfway through The Things We’ve Seen, with Book II, narrated by the delusional – or is he? – Kurt Montana, the putative fourth astronaut on Apollo 11, and Book III, which takes the point of view of the first narrator’s abandoned girlfriend, who is on a pilgrimage of sorts to Normandy, where the twin pressures of Syrian refugee migrations and the Brexit referendum are coming to a head… At the end of it all, I am left in an uncanny, dreamlike, sympathetic state where the membrane between art and life feels thin indeed.
ArtReview℗Klára Hosnedlová’s Painstaking Embroideries℗Martin Herbert℗Reviews℗18/03/2021℗The young Czech artist understands the unwritten rules well enough to scramble them℗An initial spin around Klára Hosnedlová’s Nest suggests someone who learned about contemporary art via limited hearsay, never saw any and plunged into making it anyway, oblivious to its conventions – which, in reality, is to say that this young Czech artist understands the unwritten rules well enough to scramble them. The first things that pop out in her German solo debut, most of whose elements look as much like tricked-out interior design as art, are wall-mounted multipart reliefs. These large, heavy-looking swathes of terrazzo, stylishly punctuated by shallow grooves and speckled with hemispheric glass baubles, form the backdrop for what initially appear to be realist paintings in a washed-out palette. Depicting half-naked bodies draped with fragmentary moulds, or pseudoscientific rituals using smartphones, magnifying glasses and knives, or people holding perturbed cats, these are, it turns out, painstaking embroideries. Nearby, a biomorphic grey blob of a stone table with a recess in it contains bulbous reishi mushrooms, used in Chinese medicine; on the floor beside this assemblage are pools of melted glass, like giant tears. Clustered around a steel pole that runs from floor to ceiling are myriad javelins of smoked glass, black at the top and clear at the base. This thing looks, by turns, brand-new and burned out. You access the second room through a bespoke, parallelogram-shaped doorway suggesting sci-fi design by a drunken architect and are confronted with an ersatz tilted arc: a freestanding curve of (I think) stone cladding on a frame, tucked inside which is a bench upon which you can sit and look from afar at another small embroidery, which again feels off. There’s a retrofuturist air to proceedings, but it’s muddled, fogged. Hosnedlová’s aesthetics might not look so alien, though, if you’re familiar with the Ještěd Tower, a flashy hyperboloid – like an inverted long-stemmed funnel – that perches on a mountaintop near Liberec in the Czech Republic. Erected in 1973, combining the functions of television tower, weather station and upscale hotel, it still exists, but it’s a marooned fragment of a utopian modernist future that never came to pass. I haven’t been, but some of the photographs online of its interiors are in clear correspondence with Hosnedlová’s aesthetics; certainly, the handout says, the show is based on ‘extensive research’. Her embroideries, meanwhile, are based on photographs of her friends performing gnomic rites in the tower, as if probing the place, trying to make sense of it and connect with it from a position of alienated distance; and in the process setting up a distorted, dragging model of time, counterbalancing the click of the shutter and the slow accretion of thread. The show’s title, then, is a concise marker of distance from the hopefulness of futuristic thinking – tomorrow as a safe, comfortable place – to today’s soft dystopia, with surveillance devices (like Google’s Nest) in our own homes. The irony of all this is that Hosnedlová is returning, if inadvertently, to more than one historical moment. Her engagement is surely sincere, her ability to affectively encode melancholy historical consciousness undeniable, but go beyond the details of her work and it feels like a flashback to the vanguard art of the early twenty-first century, circa 2004, when – tied to a growing interest in the archival – a large number of artists turned to research- driven rumination on lost modernist utopias and raking the ashes of the century prior. This was a period style for a while, starting when Hosnedlová was in her early teens, and it’s odd – though appropriate for a moment when art seems to have lost the knack for forward development – to see it roll around again so quickly. But then, as her show demonstrates, the past never really goes away. It keeps coming back to needle us, to remind us how much better the present could be.
ArtReview℗How Art Historian Aby Warburg Changed the Way We See℗Mark Rappolt℗Reviews℗16/03/2021℗The limits and liberations of the German scholar’s celebrated atlas of images℗Your first impression on encountering this reconstruction of German art-historian Aby Warburg’s most celebrated work is that it looks like a primitive, pinboard version of a Google image search. Or the evidence board in some 1970s crime movie. Yet to many, Warburg’s Bilderatlas (picture atlas), begun in the final years of his life and incomplete at his death, in 1929, represents the origins of modern (Western) art history, when disciplines such as iconography, sociology, ethnography and psychology were introduced into a history of Western art that had until then been dominated by aesthetics alone; to others it presages contemporary image-culture; while to others still it really is symptomatic of Warburg’s ‘crimes’. For Warburg himself it was part of ‘a laboratory of the study of civilization’. As long as you accept, according to a map that opens the presentation, that civilisation is the property of a geography that stretches from Bagdad to Coruña and from Hamburg to Aswan. Prepared according to Warburg’s instructions, it’s titled ‘The Road Map to Cultural Exchange Routes’. The Bilderatlas comprises a series of 63 panels with black-felt backgrounds that collectively feature 971 images comprising photographic reproductions of artworks stretching from Antiquity to the Renaissance, mixed in with newspaper cuttings and advertisements, stamps, images of coins and astrological charts. Warburg had begun the project of assembling his visual archive in 1924, tracking its references, evolutions and recombinations using a card index as he moved his vast undertaking towards a planned book form. A version of the project, of which this exhibition (also available for online study) is a meticulous reconstruction, was exhibited in 1929, not long before Warburg, an independent scholar and scion of a wealthy banking family, died. The planned three-volume book unrealised. The panels are arranged so as to suggest connections and leaps across time and space, and to argue for the fundamental importance of the visual within more general studies of culture. Panel 72, for example, features representations of drawings and paintings (largely Christian or Classical) featuring dining, plotting and other more or less sinister forms of conviviality alongside photographs of contemporary religious ceremonies and student dinners. Panel 77 features history paintings by Eugène Delacroix, representations of various nineteenth-century monarchs surrounded by iconography of the sea (Queen Victoria in her shell carriage), a series of stamps from France featuring Liberty sowing the seeds of freedom at sunrise, a pre-Christian coin from Syracuse and a photograph of a German golf champion caught mid-swing. Through the course of this exhibition, as the panels flip between an at times seemingly rational and at other times purely empathetic logic, you’re not sure whether Warburg’s great project is saying that something changed as civilisations travelled through time and space or that nothing really changed – that culture is no more than the product of a fixed but mutating iconography: appropriation followed by reappropriation; a series of eternal returns (Warburg was influenced by the work of Friedrich Nietzsche). It’s the kind of exercise that was still in place if, like me, you studied art history (at an institution in London associated with the one that bears Warburg’s name) during the 1990s, and informs the work of artists ranging from Marcel Duchamp to Gerhard Richter (whose own Atlas collects together photographs, sketches and newspaper cuttings that the artist has collected since the 1960s), and is more currently linked by some critics to the work of Hito Steyerl and even the montage techniques of American artist Arthur Jafa. A series of panels (39 and 41) highlighting facial expressions and body gestures suggest that Warburg might have had more than a passing interest in emojis too. You can see more sinister parallels in Trevor Paglen’s recent explorations of how AI networks are taught to ‘see’, or in Liu Chuang’s exploration of the evolving iconography of power and resistance in the three-channel video Bitcoin Mining and Field Recordings of Ethnic Minorities (2018). But Warburg wasn’t interested in China, and looked to the past more than the future. He looked to visual imagery as holding the unconscious memory of civilisation’s uncivilised pagan past (hence the reference to Mnemosyne, the Greek goddess of memory, in the Atlas’s full title), a world in which there were humans and nature, and the one interacted with the other. One of the three introductory panels setting out the methodology of the project features a fifteenth-century diagram of the body as it is affected by the animal signs of the zodiac, Leonardo da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man (c. 1487) and a sixteenth-century division of the hand according to the planets, each suggesting intriguing, yet unexplored, relations with Tantric art and Ayurvedic medicinal illustrations. Warburg wasn’t interested in that either. He was interested in the Native American Hopi people whom he visited following his marriage in 1895, documenting their serpent dances before going on in subsequent lectures to suggest that they had connections to religious thinking in ancient Athens. Because civilisation, as we know, is European, transmitted from the lands of the Bible. By contemporary standards his map looks small and selective, tracing a story that goes from Antiquity to Judeo-Christian tradition with the Renaissance as the melting pot of the two. But back in the 1920s there were no satellites, no cheap air travels, no TikTok, and maps were full of willed and unwilled blank spots. Warburg’s photographs of the Hopi rituals are not part of the Bilderatlas (their posthumous publication, to illustrate Warburg’s lectures, has led to conflict with the Hopi, who are demanding the restitution of their cultural artefacts and whose traditions do not allow information about their rituals to be passed to the uninitiated), but, alongside what may today be seen as various instances of cultural appropriation, an interest in the serpentine runs through the atlas. The panels are arranged in curves as if to suggest some sort of ouroboros, and Warburg himself, like the eighteenth-century German philosopher Gotthold Ephraim Lessing before him, was, on the evidence of the panels here, fixated on the image of Laocoön, a mythical Trojan priest who, along with his two sons, was devoured by serpents sent to execute him by the gods. For Lessing, ancient sculptures of Laocoön provided an excuse to meditate on the limits of visual art and poetry, and Warburg is doing something of the same. The 59-page brochureof captions that accompanies this exhibition, simple descriptions that range from ‘boat with musician’ to ‘Gaudenzio Ferrari, Christ Before Pilate, 1953’, seems expressly designed to emphasise the fact that words are never enough. In a present in which everyone complains about the overwhelming saturation of image culture, and moans about having to navigatea world full of half-truths, alternative truths and plain untruths, the Bilderatlas, despite its idiosyncrasies, its evident flaws and blindspots, remains an intriguing example of one man’s attempt to create some sort of coherent world-view at a time when the world, interwar and on the point of economic collapse, seemed disparate and fractured. Which can be both a dangerous and a liberating thing. The true world, after all, is often rather less coherent and far less obedient than we would like it to be.
ArtReview℗The Unapologetically Zealous Paintings of ‘Bible Nerd’ Genesis Tramaine℗Pádraic E. Moore℗Reviews℗11/03/2021℗The Brooklyn-born artist breathes new life into ancient, scriptural subjects℗The past decade has seen visual art enthralled with spirituality in its many forms. The most prevalent manifestation is in practices that draw on the trappings of occultism or refer to early-twentieth-century abstraction, itself shaped by an engagement with esotericism. These signifiers are inherently potent and would imbue almost any artwork with a certain frisson, yet the manner in which they are handled is often intentionally ironic. Artists pussyfoot around religious symbolism with measured detachment, ensuring that there is no risk of being mistaken for a true believer. For such commitment would transform the status of an artwork into a doctrinaire, creedal statement and expose its maker to the vagaries of a system that demands novelty. In contrast to all this are the unapologetically zealous paintings of Genesis Tramaine; the output of one who wears their faith on their sleeve. The Southern Baptist beliefs of this self-declared ‘Bible nerd’ are the impetus for her work. Christianity was undoubtedly vital to the evolution of Western art in terms of patronage and content, but in recent centuries this coupling has produced little more than a surfeit of maudlin tableaux-vivants. The Brooklyn-born Tramaine, by contrast, breathes new life into ancient, scriptural subjects, creating compelling images – Black figures built from vigorous tangles of brush-work, oil stick and spraypaint, with titles like Prodigal Son and Witnessing Grace (all works 2020) – that beguile even the most agnostic. Absent from any of the documentation of this show are the inscriptions that adorn the sides of almost all the paintings but which are visible only in profile. Some of these are psalms; others, eg ‘God is not mad @ you today’, evoke textspeak. The inclusion of these is a testament to the extent to which the messianic mission of spreading the ‘Good News of Jesus Christ’ is integral to Tramaine’s process. The influence of Jean-Michel Basquiat’s art brut is palpable here, while the dominant compositional formula – head/shoulders against radiant monochrome backdrop – evokes Francis Bacon’s 1970s portraits. But these allusions are tempered by a vocabulary that is entirely Tramaine’s own. Gestural flourishes in oil stick suggest catharsis and hint at visual glossolalia; the fruits of an ascended ecstatic state. Her use of colour is also striking; aside from a few flashes of ultramarine and azurite the palette is consistently organic and alluvial, underscoring the tenet that divinity is present in every earthbound being.
ArtReview℗The Artists Mapping Colonial Brazil℗Oliver Basciano℗Reviews℗09/03/2021℗At a time when indigenous land is once again under attack, exhibitions in São Paulo offer urgent perspectives℗In 1962 Glauco Rodrigues was invited to a residency programme in Rome. When the artist returned home to Brazil two years later, he found the country a very different place to the one he had left. The leftwing leadership of João Goulart had been deposed in a violent coup, replaced by an increasingly authoritarian military dictatorship, and the good times Rodrigues had known previously – the glamorous Brazil of Modernism, Bossa Nova and Cinema Novo – was receding into the shadows. It was at this point the artist decided to embark on a history of his country, producing dozens of paintings over the following three decades in acrylic, oil and ink on both canvas and card. Thirty of the Tropicália-inflected works hang at São Paulo’s Bergamin &amp; Gomide, where the walls have been painted in the yellow, green and blue of the Brazilian flag. They boast the alluring style of contemporaneous travel advertising and an equally cheering palette (Rodrigues, who died in 2004, also designed album covers for the likes of Neguinho da Beija-Flor and João Bosco, a few of which are displayed on the gallery’s reception desk). These are paintings that revel in tongue-in-cheek clichés: there are copious images of beaches, samba dancers, football and parrots. One textile work, hung as a banner from the ceiling, reads ‘YES WE HAVE BANANAS’, the first word in English, the rest in Portuguese. On canvas, Rodrigues’s compositions are like modern-day history paintings, with multiple figures, scenes and narratives present within any one frame. But amongst the exoticised symbols of Brazil nestle darker elements. In a still life of yellow flowers, a skull peeps from behind the petals; in another work small vignettes featuring people sunbathing are interspersed with scenes of slaughter. The acrylic on canvas D’après Almeida Júnior (1981) features a portrait of a worker sat resting with his axe, painted in the heroic realism beloved by the nineteenth-century Brazilian artist Almeida Júnior. Yet in Rodrigues’s appropriation of the older artist’s style, his subject, topless, doleful in yellow shorts, is depicted against the green silhouette of Brazil; a hint perhaps of the environmental destruction that fuelled the Brazilian boom times. In the triptych Retrato de Henriette Amado (1970), the titular Brazilian radical pedagogue and proponent of emancipatory education is pictured surrounded by political figures from the military regime, men against whom she was ideologically opposed. The works in We Happened To Be Cannibals come together as an encyclopaedic study of Brazilian culture and twentieth-century history (not least how Oswald de Andrade’s 1928 ‘Manifesto Antropófago’ has loomed large in its postcolonial identity). One enduring motif is the indigenous figure, hardly surprising given the dictatorship oversaw a genocide of an estimated 8,000 of this land’s original owners. Na Floresta (1981) features an indigenous man holding a toad; overlooking his shoulder, menacing, is a soldier. Persona (1974) shows a man in a suit, his face out of frame. Behind him, pushed to the background, an Amerindian man in traditional clothes. The plight of the indigenous has been raised by leftwing Brazilian artists for several generations, but rarely have artists from those communities been given a platform to represent themselves. This is gradually changing: the last Videobrasil festival in 2019 featured seven indigenous artists and collectives; Pinacoteca de São Paulo is currently hosting Véxoa, a survey of work around indigenous issues; and in 2019, Sandra Benites’s hire by the Museu de Arte de São Paulo marked the first time an indigenous person took a curatorial position at a Brazilian museum. Among the artists who have emerged through this tardy institutional recognition is Jaider Esbell. The Makuxi artist and activist will feature at the next Bienal de São Paulo and currently has a solo show at Galleria Millan in the city. The open frontage of Galleria Millan allows the wind to gust through several ceiling-hung cotton sheets featuring a series of semiabstract compositions made in natural plant dyes. Collectively they are titled Jenipapal (2020) – there are ten in total – and typical is O cajado do Pajé, in which the titular walking stick is extravagantly decorated with a series of chickens that seem to emanate from the side. In Kono’ (Chuva) a face emerges from the complex grid of parallel brush strokes, bordered by a series of fish pictograms. The raw surface of Era’tî is mostly covered with puddles of the murky yellow and brown dyes, a line-drawn ox-type animal attracting the eye to the top right corner. As well as works on paper and further wall-hung unframed cotton paintings, Esbell’s show is completed by a series of works on canvas, the acrylic paint overlaid with thick pen marks. These are highly detailed, richly coloured and, from a Eurocentric point of view, surreal in their combination of figurative elements. In his curatorial statement however Esbell notes the subject is a tree known as the Jenipapo, a ‘fruit-technology and one of my grandmothers’: what I comprehend as dreamlike is, within Makuxi cosmology, no less real than anything one can touch and see. In A descida do pajé Jenipapo do reino das medicinas (2021) a boat floats along a river, the prow and stern morphing into monstrous heads with sharp teeth. A trunk grows from the centre of this vessel, its foliage convulsing the sky into green, orange and blue swirling light. In another painting for example, O anúncio do diluvio (2020), a bird’s face stares straight out to the viewer, its plumage merging into the foliage and sky in the background, its scale out of all proportion to the coiling snake, sharp-eared mammal and pink-beaked bird that flank it. If Rodrigues’s project was to chart Brazil’s coloniser history, then Esbell’s is to map the land against which the white man waged war. The artist invokes the concept of txaísmo in his practice, a manner of charting indigenous lands that is not derived from Western models of geography or cartography but instead includes the visual, psychological and spiritual space of a territory too. At a time when indigenous land in Brazil is once again under attack from a militaristic and would-be authoritarian government, providing space for artists from that culture to speak, not as victims, but as guides to possible new ways of living with the world, seems essential.   Jaider Esbell: Ruku, Galeria Millan, São Paulo, 20 February – 20 March
ArtReview℗The Tokenism of Netflix’s ‘The White Tiger’℗Skye Arundhati Thomas℗Reviews℗01/03/2021℗Almost every scene in Ramin Bahrani’s film is loaded up with the corrupt duplicity of everyday India℗In the opening scene of Netflix’s The White Tiger (2021), a drunk couple swerve and jerk their SUV through a smoggy night in New Delhi. Pinky, played by Priyanka Chopra, clutches at the steering wheel with both hands; she’s feeling reckless. She turns to her husband Ashok (Rajkummar Rao): they’re flirting, they’re acting intentionally risky, their entitlement sped up by the booze. In the backseat is Balram (Adarsh Gourav), their chauffeur, smiling but stressed, pleading with them to be cautious. Pinky hits the accelerator and takes her eyes off the road. The inevitable happens; she runs down a young boy as he steps off the pavement, lit up for a second in the car’s white headlights. The film, which is based on the eponymous 2008 novel by Aravind Adiga (and won the Man Booker the same year), shows an India that in its post-industrial, post-independence boom, is governed by systems of exclusion, corruption and extortion. Its characters are super-rich upper caste Indians that speed through the country with limitless credit cards and without conscience. We are pushed to take a closer look at the degrading interpersonal dynamics that play out between those that sit behind the wheel when tragedies happen, and those that are forced to face the fallout. Later, Ashok’s family coerces Balram into signing a confession, making him take responsibility for the crime. Despite this, Pinky’s hit-and-run doesn’t register with the police: the child was from an unhoused family, of the thousands that live under tarpaulin along Indian metropolitan streets. The child has no record, the family makes no complaint, most probably because the police have never protected them. Pinky flies to America in shame, slipping Balram an envelope of 100 dollars in cash as an apology. The literal price, according to her, of his freedom. Caste drives the logic of every interaction, and almost every scene in Ramin Bahrani’s film is loaded up with the duplicity that is everyday India: its marble-floored malls, towering air-conditioned luxury apartment blocks, all marked by those that they exclude. The film makes it obvious that both public and private space are always coded by caste: who can sit where, who touches whom, who lives up in the penthouse but has a direct line to, and is supported by, those who live down in the garage in windowless rooms. In one scene, Ashok and Balram share a moment of strained intimacy under a mosquito net in the basement where Balram sleeps, cockroaches crawling all over the floor. “I want to change my country’s future,” Ashok whispers dramatically, as though trying to inspire Balram with his ambition. He confesses a desire to produce music, crooning an out-of-tune verse for effect. Balram can sing too, he says, and breaks into a couplet his grandmother taught him, “I don’t want to live in your world,” Balram sings as his boss drinks straight from the bottle. Ashok is blind to the subtext, he grooves to his driver’s voice, closing his eyes. But Balram doesn’t want to live in Ashok’s world, a world where aspirations are only afforded to some. His boss’s dreams are fanciful, altered by whims; even the pursuit of them is just rhetoric. When Balram imagines a radical future for himself, as Prime Minister for instance, he says he wants to fix the Indian sewage systems first. Sewage is a clear marker of caste oppression, where generations of lower caste people have been forced to do sanitation work for centuries. It is the labour that is so often ignored in the grandiose rhetoric of Indian democracy, progress and modernisation. But, according to the film’s logic, Balram can only make his dreams come true with brutal and drastic moves. The White Tiger is too often riddled with cliché, and indulges in simplistic storytelling. It keeps one eye on an international audience, reducing complexity to binaries. The overarching metaphor in the film is Balram’s comparison of the caste system to a rooster coop: kill or get killed. He says, in an aside to the audience, ‘there are just two castes: men with big bellies, and men with small bellies. And only two destinies: eat or get eaten up.’ This is a gross oversimplification, and ultimately glamourises violence as the only means to an end.
ArtReview℗India’s Vanishing Children: Deepa Anappara’s ‘Djinn Patrol on the Purple Line’℗Fi Churchman℗Book Review℗23/02/2021℗A debut novel informed by a decade of reportage focused on the effects of poverty and religious violence on education℗In an unnamed city in India, a child disappears. Local police are called, but they don’t care. The child is from a basti, a shantytown on the outskirts of the city towered over by marble-floored ‘Hi-fi’ condos where people who do matter live. Nine-year-old protagonist Jai takes inspiration from his favourite reality-TV programme, Police Patrol, and from fictional sleuth Byomkesh Bakshi, forming a ‘detectiving team’ and recruiting his friends Pari and Faiz to find their missing neighbour. While they hunt for clues, more children vanish. Djinn Patrol on the Purple Line is Deepa Anappara’s debut novel, informed by 11 years of reportage focused on the effects of poverty and religious violence on children’s education. Having spent much of that time interviewing children from marginalised communities, Anappara contextualises the story as a national issue, where children drop out of school because they have to earn money to eat, or because they are displaced by religious persecution, and where it’s estimated that a child goes missing every eight minutes, thought to be trafficked for slave labour, prostitution or the organ trade. Writing from Jai’s perspective, Anappara turns statistics churned out by the media into a voice, so that, as she says in her afterword, ‘we are reminded of the faces behind the numbers’. Jai, Pari and Faiz seek to uncover the truth about the disappearances, wandering the nearby bazaar, questioning ‘suspects’ and gathering information from the families of the vanished. But they are also just children: Jai watches TV and plays cricket in dusty alleyways; Pari dreams of getting a scholarship so that she can become a doctor; Faiz works at a café to help his parents make ends meet. Reality collides with fiction: children whose more innocent fears focus on the spectres of the novel’s title are also confronted with the grinding hardship of India’s poorest societies, where girls are expected to grow up and become wives and mothers, and Muslims are ostracised. The language, playful and light in its child’s point of view, is held in constant tension: as the young detectives come to terms with grief and bereavement, darker political and social forces, like the ever-present smog that makes ‘shadows sprawl’ and looks ‘like the devil’s own breath’, threaten to engulf their lives.
ArtReview℗Is Nature Healing?℗En Liang Khong℗Book Review℗23/02/2021℗Cal Flyn’s ‘Islands of Abandonment’ is an atlas of the spaces over which we once ruled, now deserted℗What happens when the wild reclaims the future? The early lockdowns of COVID-19 were filled with strange dreams that ‘nature is healing’. Dolphins were sighted in the canals of Venice; a herd of elephants raided a stash of corn wine in Yunnan (these stories turned out to be false). But such surreality populates Cal Flyn’s Islands of Abandonment: an atlas of the spaces over which we once ruled, now deserted. The ghost town of Plymouth, on the Caribbean island of Montserrat – totalled by volcanic eruptions during the 1990s – makes a spooky stage-set. Flyn encounters a former hotel packed with ash slurry, ‘set like concrete, before its outer walls gave way to reveal this solid record of its negative space’: an unintentional recreation of Rachel Whiteread’s House (1993), she observes. Flyn has a keen eye for how the pastoral and the political intersect. Threading her way along the razor-wire-lined demilitarised zone on Cyprus, she describes the new life – rare bee-orchids and wild dwarf-sheep – that has swept across no-man’s-land: each species ‘a marker of time passed in bloody stalemate’. There is great violence in these landscapes: the human mark in the ecological record is Flyn’s leitmotif. Wading into the toxic intertidal waters off Staten Island, rusting ships up ahead, she finds a teeming seabed: ‘all the crabs you can eat… But a single Newark blue-clawed crab carries enough dioxin in its body to give a person cancer’. And then to Place à Gaz, Verdun, where the chemical weapons of the First World War were burnt into the ground, and where today the soil is laced with arsenic. Yet in Flyn’s telling, we need not submit to dystopia. Even here, vegetation has found a way to survive: metallophyte moss has adapted, stashing poisonous salts away in its tendrils, in turn cleansing the earth. What’s the message? Flyn’s diagnosis is that we are too busy ‘playing at being stewards of the Earth’ and offers a corrective to the fantasy that we can geo-engineer our way out of extreme, compounding planetary crisis. But ruins can also be havens for new life, ‘all the stranger and more valuable for its resilience’. I love these sublime, liberating portraits: glimpses of hidden histories and alternate futures that might outlive us all.
ArtReview℗Art Supermarket: Exhibitions to See in Paris℗Louise Darblay℗Reviews℗19/02/2021℗While museums in the French capital remain closed, commercial art galleries offer some much-needed respite℗In early February, as the French government announced that the reopening of cultural venues would be postponed once again due to the pandemic, more than a hundred museum directors penned a letter to Minister of Culture Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin protesting the decision and drawing attention to art’s potential as ‘a sensitive aid to mental wellbeing to cope with this crisis’, while also pointing out their extensive experience in regulating traffic (where better to enforce social distancing, one-way circulation and limited numbers than a ticketed exhibition?). While the ministry has since responded with vague allusions to a possible earlier return; museums have been closed for four months. Yet those with a more optimistic bent may be inclined to see the city’s cultural offerings as a glass half full rather than a glass half empty; indeed many Parisians are discovering a plethora of commercial art galleries – which, classified as ‘essential businesses’, have been permitted to remain open – previously known only to the initiated. Indeed Paris’s retail sector has carried on largely unrestricted since November. Depending on your perspective, the status of galleries in this regard is either the result of a useful loophole or a moment of honesty in regard to their mercantile nature. Although for noncollectors like myself, gallery visits remain an important alternative to shopping. So it is perhaps with a hint of irony that, for the inauguration of its first Paris space, Galleria Continua presents itself as an ‘art supermarket’. The show is the result of a carte blanche given to French street artist and photographer JR, who has capitalised on the venue’s recent history as a wholesale leather-goods shop by filling the existing floor-to-ceiling shelving units with a mix of artworks and artist editions by the gallery’s international roster (from Ai Weiwei and Anish Kapoor to Daniel Buren and Kiki Smith), gallery publications and, in the ‘deli corner’, edibles. The gridded-format of the shelved space combined with the neon shopping baskets that greet you at the entrance (but no, you can’t touch the art – or the food), a takeaway coffee station and signature trompe-l’oeil interventions by the artist-curator, evoke something more akin to a concept store than a supermarket. What concept, you ask? Well, if we’re to believe the show’s title, Truc à Faire, it’s something to do – both for the gallery and its audience, one can assume. It’s light and playful, quite superficially so, but after a year of restrictions and forced isolation, it’s also restorative. Another artist-curated show, at Lévy Gorvy, offers an almost perfect counterpoint. Horizons, a group show of painting and sculpture assembled by Etel Adnan (whose paintings also hang at Continua), is a poetic exercise in contemplation around the titular line dear to the ninety-five-year-old artist and poet. At once figurative and abstract, literal and metaphorical, the horizon serves as a simple yet potent motif to connect works across art history and regions. Up on a plinth, resting at eye level, Simone Fattal’s (Adnan’s partner) glazed stoneware and porcelain clouds look like sugar-coated candy, both rough and delicate in finish. Their quietude and fragility are set in contrast to the repetitive straight lines of a small Agnes Martin drawing and a series of largescale semiabstract paintings by Christine Safa in flaming ochre and Mediterranean blue. Another dialogue takes place in the next room around a row of Adnan’s signature smallscale landscapes. Colourful, impressionistic in treatment, these semiabstract horizon scenes face a contrasting presentation of works by Ugo Rondinone: the monumental horizontal flatlines of vierterjulizweitausendundelf (2011) and the vertical Black, green, yellow, blue, pink mountain (2019), a rock formation rendered in flashy colours. Meditative and rich in aesthetic associations, Horizons feels like a personal show, in which the artist opens up conversations while inviting viewers, in lack of perspective, to look into the distance. From contemplation to obsession: Claude Viallat, a founder of the avant-garde movement Supports/Surfaces, which sought to deconstruct painting in the aftermath of the May 1968 student uprisings, has taken over one of Galerie Templon’s spaces with his pulsating patterned compositions. His deconstructive approach has remained consistent for nearly five decades: bed sheets, sunshade covers, aprons and other domestic fabrics patchworked together to form a canvas, on which the artist systematically paints the same semiorganic, semigeometric motif. Yet here, in his latest series, the compositions bear sutures: crisscrossing strips of fabric stitch and mend the ‘tears’ that reveal the wall behind it. Hung by their corners on the gallery walls, they look like joyful DIY banners, while suggesting some healing ritual performed by the artist. Turning a corner or two takes me into the self-contained universe of French artist Laurent Le Deunff at Galerie Semiose. Curious and ambitious, the show is full of mysterious narratives set somewhere between a hunting cabin, a natural history museum (or could it be an homage to the nearby but locked-down Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature?) and a public garden. Hanging on one of the walls in the first room is a giant necklace made with what looks like huge sharks’ teeth; propped up on small metal rods atop a plinth are sculptures of various slugs and less identifiable creatures; on another wall, wooden bas-reliefs depict moles and badgers making their way through underground passageways. Stepping into the next room we enter a clearing: the ground is covered in soil, moss and trees, populated by sculptures of animal heads on plinths that look like public memorials to dead species. Seemingly carved in wood, the sculptures are in fact moulded in cement, and it turns out the sharks’ teeth are made of wood – small deceptions that further confuse the viewer in search of context. In drawings that line the wall of this garden, we see a cat in the artist’s studio, surrounded by some of the work presented here. There are no traces of the artist (barring the hand that made the works), or of humans in general. Is it an homage to the reign of other animal species and the artist’s feline companion (an exhibition text quotes William Burroughs’s view of cats as ‘as psychic companions, as familiars’), or are we projected into a future where all that remains of animals are representations?
ArtReview℗‘Why Are They Here?’ – Bangkok Art Biennale, ‘Escape Routes’, Review℗Max Crosbie-Jones℗Reviews℗17/02/2021℗The exhibition is at its best when artworks appear to disrupt the event’s sweeping therapeutic narrative℗The Thai Kingdom is, for once, a picture of civic health. Tucked away in one of the second Bangkok Art Biennale’s ten venues, Prateep Suthathongthai’s photorealistic painting Dusit Thani Province 1 (2020) depicts a pointy-roofed Thai temple hemmed in by neat lawns and white crenellated walls. Just beyond lie the pintsize, European-style buildings that made up King Rama VI’s Dusit Thani, a miniature model city that served as his proof-of-concept playground for the principles of democracy, complete with party elections, a constitution and even a daily newspaper, back in the 1910s. Suthathongthai’s carefully hand-rendered recreations of archive photos are joined by large-format UV prints of the project’s original blueprints, while projected on the floor is drone footage of a dusty northeastern Thai village built by the government for former Communist Party members – failed fighters for a very different utopia – during the 1970s. The work hangs in The Prelude, a marble-hewn show-suite for One Bangkok: a 167,000 sqm, ‘game-changing district’ being built, just steps away, by a sister company of BAB 2020’s key sponsor, Thai-Chinese drinks conglomerate ThaiBev. Upon completion, this US$3.9-billion development will be ‘a new global landmark on the world stage’, replete with ultraluxury condos, office towers, retail precincts and culture spaces, not to mention prices likely to keep nearby slum dwellers at arm’s length. Emerging from The Prelude, I am met by the clanging of its breakneck construction, and struck by the poles of inertia, subjugation and progress that Suthathongthai brings into question: true democracy still remains a Thai fantasy of sorts, yet profoundly inequitable urban gentrification schemes sprout as if by magic. After the inaugural edition in 2018, several academics concluded – in contrast with a heap of positive media coverage – that BAB’s artists had been co-opted by an ungainly spectacle. This mega-event aimed at belatedly branding Bangkok as a city of art affirmed both the neoliberal agenda of its backers and the charismatic careerism of the esteemed curator helming it, all while saying next to nothing about the political woes afflicting the country and seeming wildly out of step with the unruly, anti-institutional urges of many emerging Thai artists and events. For the most, I agreed with these counterhegemonic critiques – but Suthathongthai reminds me that things aren’t so cut and dry. Bringing the iniquitous character of the country to the fore, subverting the dominant hegemony, his work shows that critical artistic practices can, to paraphrase political theorist Chantal Mouffe, ‘disrupt the smooth image that corporate capitalism is trying to spread’. Scaled back but only slightly humbled, BAB 2020 is at its best at moments like these: when the platitudinous ‘hope’ and ‘survival’ rhetoric of artistic director and BAB mastermind Apinan Poshyananda’s ‘Escape Routes’ theme – spurred initially by the knottiness of the United Nations’ sustainable development goals but since amplified by the pandemic – finds little sanctuary; when works seem to misbehave by offering up something richer and more rooted than the event’s sweeping therapeutic narrative and hubristic attempts to remake the world would seem to allow. At the city’s ailing kunsthalle, for example, Thai auteur Pen-Ek Ratanaruang’s short film Two Little Soldiers (2020) follows two squaddies as they fish and talk by a forest-fringed pond in a Thai army camp. In this sketch, lifted from a forthcoming feature inspired by Guy de Maupassant’s short story ‘Deux Amis’ (1882), a crackling radio reports news of violence on the streets of a remote Bangkok as they idle, leading us to ponder the extent of their complicity. Another video, at Bangkok Art and Culture Centre (BACC), the BAB’s main venue, I-na Phuyuthanon’s Harmonimilitary (2020) explores strife in Thailand’s deep south simply yet affectingly: dressed in a flowing turquoise burka, she ambles around a lush village where separatist violence has been met with public vilification and peacekeeping operations. On an upper floor at The Parq – a sparkling new office building also linked to ThaiBev – a painting by Yuree Kensaku, Bleu Blanc Rouge (2020), raises the spectre of republicanism with a cartoonish send-up of Eugène Delacroix’s Liberty Leading the People (1830), complete with a Tricolore-waving chicken. And nearby, relative newcomer Rungruang Sittirerk’s The Metamorphosis (2020) is an installation of 1,997 clay works – a reference to the year of the Tom Yum Kung financial crash – located beside a window overlooking the Klong Toey slum, source of much of the city’s cheap labour. If this selection implies a certain bias towards the local contingent, it merely reflects facts on the ground. BAB 2020 has dual missions: introducing 31 Thai artists to a globalised international contemporary artworld on one hand; bringing works by 55 of that world’s artists to Bangkok for its citizenry’s betterment on the other. It excels at neither but proves far more accomplished at the former: while most Thais contribute new commissions, most of the international contingent – Ai Weiwei, Yoko Ono and John Akomfrah among them – deliver old works that serve to dilute rather than reinforce. Many, especially the glut of photography, seem entirely decoupled from their counterparts, immediate context, even their place in time. Why are they here? Most appear to have been selected simply because they were at hand, or easily executable mid-pandemic, or help summon the star power to which Poshyananda is clearly so in thrall. He is BAB 2020’s biggest enigma. In the runup, he revealed that the decision to go ahead largely rested on a calculated desire to capture some of the attention that would have been directed at the better-established, cancelled competition (this was later confirmed in a press kit underscoring the ‘big opportunities to gain much more share of voice in international media’.) In the opening days that raw opportunism was replaced by a careful defensiveness, as he fielded questions about the government’s heavy-handed suppression of the recent student protest-movement, and the 25 BAB artists who had issued a letter railing against it. (An official written statement in support of the protesters never materialised, but Poshyananda tried to burnish the BAB’s reputation – ThaiBev’s symbiotic ties to the palace, government and military be damned! – by claiming solidarity.) Ever since then, the impression of a one-man show, an auteurist affair, ‘smooth image’ personified, has been hard to shake. In every talk, video tour and media interview, he appears every inch the smart-casual showman: repeats his ‘Escape Routes’ lines and opines on the logistical challenges overcome. Littered with references to power-mongers, pollution, greed and plagues, his BAB 2020 writings, meanwhile, continue a long Poshyananda tradition of emphasising art’s conciliatory and cathartic role, only to retool that schtick for the geopolitical and epidemiological shitshow that is now. All this posturing aside, there are rewarding moments. A strong vein of ecologically minded work runs throughout – fitting at a time when Bangkok’s PM2.5 levels are slowly killing us. There is also a peppy section at the BACC where fantastical visions from across the Middle East and Asia collide. This includes, among other works, Kubra Khademi’s gouache drawings of eviscerated female bodies (The Birth Giving, 2019); the chimera-filled Mongol Zurag-style paintings of Nomin Bold and Baatarzorig Batjargal; and Chantana Tiprachart’s beguiling tone poem in Lai Torn (2020), a video in which a boat decked with candles for the Lao-Thai Naga festival slowly burns. And winning the prize for biggest showboat is Anish Kapoor’s Push/Pull (2009). Hearing someone compare this round monolith of soft, cinnamon-red wax to a giant Babybel quelled only some of its ferocity; it springs, like a blood-curdled sledge sent screaming from one of the 16 levels of Buddhist hell, out of the marble floors of the famous Wat Pho temple’s sermon hall. Speaking of hell, his assistants apparently endured two weeks of hotel quarantine, as did performance artists such as Melati Suryodarmo and Miles Greenberg, so the show could shuffle on. You have to admire such dedication. Still, such pulses of pleasure are always tempered by a nagging sense that audience and artists alike would be better served by an event that smacks less of spectacle-led short-termism. In a press conference last October, BAB was blithely repositioned as a national saviour, as a ‘prototype event’ that will help recalibrate and revive the country’s decimated tourism industry (it failed dismally, through no fault of its own). But, from my vantage point, its own long-term fate looks even more questionable: it has revealed no collecting urge, no nurturing instinct, no memory beyond its duration, no clear sense of mission and no roadmap beyond its next edition. This lack of focus is doubly alarming when you consider the core sponsor’s fixation on the numbers (allegedly, 3 million Thais and foreigners visited, and over 4.5 billion baht was stimulated, in 2018) – and the fact that those numbers have now, surely, all but collapsed. The net result is all-too familiar: a biennale no greater than the sum of its parts, an expolike gathering that talks a good game but, in actuality, offers up only random ‘discoveries’ – a bit of art from here, there and just about everywhere – as its intellectual prize. As for the near future, the escape route to better global art pastures that Poshyananda has built for Thailand could well vanish as soon as 2023: the year his and ThaiBev’s commitment ends and, conveniently, its dream city launches.
ArtReview℗Rome’s Quadriennale: An Act of Love for a Mutant World℗Mariacarla Molè℗Reviews℗16/02/2021℗Can the institution – with the 2020 edition, ‘FUORI’ – repair its past?℗When I arrived in Rome to visit the Quadriennale, Termini train station welcomed me dressed up in green, white and red lights. The same colours, the colours of the Italian flag, were projected on the facades of all the main politically symbolic places in Rome. The concept of homeland and the spirit of national pride seem to be in a state of robust health, reborn with the pandemic crisis; which, given the most obvious effects of that crisis, engendered a feeling of mistrust that stayed with me for the entire trip. Maybe that’s why the Norma Jeane light installation Corpo di fabbrica (2020), pulsating within the triumphal arched entrance of the Palazzo delle Esposizioni, was so impressive. At night the white light pulses to the rhythm of the artist’s breath: a life signal from somewhere else, generating a spatial and temporal disorientation. It articulates a clear desire on the part of FUORI (which means out) to solve the distinction between inside and outside the institution, and to position itself beyond the representation of power and the normative narrative of tradition. And this makes me realise that this facade also sounds like a programmatic declaration, although with different results. One naturally has to wonder how an institution like the Quadriennale, which has its roots in the history of Italy’s fascist regime(it was conceived in 1927 to exalt Italian art as a symbol of Italian supremacy), can repair its past and reframe its primary purpose. With this in mind, curators Stefano Collicelli Cagol and Sarah Cosulich set out to curate the exhibition much as you would care for a baby born out of violence (borrowing the metaphor from the plot of the 1974 novel La Storia, by Elsa Morante, in which a mother lovingly raises a child born from a rape committed by a German soldier). ‘Only for a redeemed mankind has its past become citable in all its moments,’ says Walter Benjamin, and I think that sums up the purpose of the exhibition. That’s the desire that poignantly emerges from architect Alessandro Bava’s critical reinterpretation of the Quadriennale’s interiors, which transforms the spaces into an ephemeral stage, made of unfinished plasterboard, emptying the violent magnificence of the space, punctuated by the regal yellow marble columns and half pilasters. The end result is that you feel that the space can breathe again, no more so than when you encounter Cloti Ricciardi’s Respiro (1968), a room covered in a white fabric that can be moved by visitors, creating the illusion that the room is alive while also suggesting a stinging critique of the conventional white cube. The criticism becomes disruptive in Berlin-based Tomaso De Luca’s site-specific Die Schlüssel des Schlosses (2020), an installation that destroys the walls and the ceiling of its space, but returns to subtlety in Lorenza Longhi’s intervention: a paper ceiling that effectively curls up the space and filters the natural light above it. More ironic is the effect of Petrit Halilaj and Alvaro Urbano’s giant flowers, 7 aprile 2020 (2020; the title reflects the date they were supposed to be married, an event postponed due to COVID-19), which hang on a staircase originally intended as a stage for fascist propaganda, and play with the colossal formats that characterise fascist rhetoric and its representations of power. And truly elegant is the choice to show, in a gallery traditionally designated for sculpture, a dialogue between Irma Blank’s Bleu Carnac (1992) – a series of 38 canvases that fuse something of the vertical sacrality of a megalith and the horizontal legibility of a book – and Micol Assaël’s Stone Broken Circuit (2016) – an open electrical circuit mapped out on the floor in Bakelite, a nonconductive plastic used in the fabrication of early electronic devices, with small white marble cubes dispersed throughout as if to symbolise a certain unpredictability. In a space that is, thanks to Bava’s intervention, bent, oblique and unstable, a space that criticises the authority of tradition, the bodies that inhabit it best are those that deform themselves to give life, such as Lisetta Carmi’s Il parto (1968), a series of eight images documenting a birth. Or those that so deeply interact with their environment that they become part of it, as in Simone Forti’s video Zuma News (2014), in which she visits a beach and interacts with water, sand and newspapers, demonstrating the papers’ capacity to absorb water and sands’ capacity to become part of the sea. Also present are Michele Rizzo’s sculptures, in a trance from having danced all night, and the bodies, filled with homoerotic desire, that invade Sylvano Bussotti’s drawings and collages. The curatorial narrative is precise and persistent from room to room, leading to an internal balcony where, in the full light that falls through a skylight, Salvo’s candied glimpses of hallucinated cities made of geometrical forms in incandescent colours and lights are the postcard I take away from the exhibition: an act of love for a mutant world in transition and containing many shades – an unexpected trip, much like visiting FUORI itself. 
ArtReview℗The Reverse Marxism of Adam Curtis’s ‘Can’t Get You Out Of My Head’℗Tom Whyman℗Opinion℗10/02/2021℗Why it would be better if the filmmaker aspired to be less of a historian, and more of a philosopher℗I love Adam Curtis films. Yes, I know there’s an argument that they’re all style over substance, the credulous person’s idea of a master of suspicion. Yes, I know that his technique and his rhetoric and the scope of his interests are so well-defined, so immediately recognisable, that he often seems to be veering towards self-parody. But I can’t help myself: I grew up watching Adam Curtis films. When I watch them, I feel at home. They might not be as profound as I thought they were when I was a teenager – but that doesn’t mean they aren’t wonderfully, bombastically fun. Adam Curtis, the poet of the Wikipedia binge: skimming over the surface of the superstructure, sparking sudden, otherwise hidden connections into perfect, blinding clarity. Sculpting the detritus of every news cycle he’s ever been subjected to, the whole of his adult life, into a sprawling rhizomatic narrative, endlessly exploding everywhere, of how and why It’s All Gone Wrong. If, like me, you really enjoy watching Adam Curtis films, then starting this week you’re in for a treat. Can’t Get You Out Of My Head (2021) consists of six films, all around 75 minutes long: his first true series since 2011’s All Watched Over By Machines of Loving Grace, and his longest since Pandora’s Box, way back in 1993. Judging by the rough cuts I’ve seen, if you’ve ever seen an Adam Curtis film before, you will not be surprised by what any of the episodes are like: Can’t Get You Out Of My Head both looks and sounds like everything else he’s ever done, and is built around roughly the same themes. Billed as ‘An Emotional History of the Modern World’, the series is primarily focused on the conflict between individual and collective authority, the rise of anti-democratic technocracy, and our felt inability to act transformatively in the world. Where the series does distinguish itself, however, is in terms of its ambition and scope. The narrative that Curtis presents spans the whole of the globe – although it is especially focused on America, the UK, China, and Russia. Its structure often feels like that of an epic postmodern novel: to tell his story, Curtis picks out certain strange, conflicted (anti-)heroes – individuals whose successes, failures, contradictions and ambiguities mirror the more general, global forces they exist within. Among the most prominent of these, whose stories run over several episodes, are Michael de Freitas, aka Michael X – slum landlord, gangster, radical black rights activist, and murderer; Jiang Qing – wife of Chairman Mao, architect of the Cultural Revolution, and fiercely ambitious radical individualist; and Eduard Limonov – trendy Soviet émigré novelist, punkish enemy of global financial capitalism, and fascist. Along the way, Curtis introduces us to a whole host of other histories and individuals – taking in everything from the rise of conspiratorialism, the collapse of the coal mining industry, the life story of Tupac Shakur’s mother Afeni, the West German student movement, the Voynich Manuscript, and trans rights. In each case, the lives Curtis portrays are used to illustrate the tension between individual autonomy and collective authority – a tension which often manifests itself directly in the actions and motivations of these particular individuals. In Curtis’s telling, as ever, attempts to strengthen the individual against a sick society, while often motivated by noble ideals, are ultimately self-defeating – because they end up weakening the collective to such an extent that we are left unable to resist the rampant, globalising forces which now reign supreme and dominant over seemingly everything in the world. Curtis’s heroes struggle, as we all do, like an animal against its trap, bleeding to death in its increasingly frantic efforts to tear itself loose. This is all very interesting – but, for all I am a helpless Curtis stan, from the films I’ve seen, the series is not without its problems. These problems stem largely from the fact that Curtis is, by his own admission, ‘fundamentally a historian’ – and that he is also, we must add, fundamentally a historian who isn’t really interested in economics. Curtis is brilliant when it comes to detailing developments in the superstructure – our culture, our institutions, our ideas and systems of power. But he is much less able to link these developments to the material base on which they are built. If Curtis is anything, he is a reverse Marxist, for whom the superstructure ultimately determines the base. This, I think, is where the accusations of aestheticism which sometimes dog Curtis are most justifiable. In Can’t Get You Out Of My Head, history can end up seeming just like a bunch of stuff which happened – because one important man decided this, and then someone else on the other side of the world came up with something else, but then those turned out to be just fantasies, and then Bill Clinton got elected, and so on and so forth. There is rarely any particular notice taken of the fact that sometimes things happen because people need to pay rent, or to eat. We drift forever, in a world that has conspired to make us alone and stupid and lost, and if we ever try and do anything good then we are so stupid and lost that it must inevitably go wrong, and end up making everything even worse (arguably Curtis is himself guilty of a form of the ‘Oh Dearism’ he has critiqued as being endemic in television news). It would be better if Curtis aspired to be less of a historian, and more of a philosopher. Because what he has his finger on in Can’t Get You Out Of My Head is not just a historical problem, but a philosophical one: the question of how the individual is related to society; of why we feel the need to distinguish ourselves in some way from the rest of the individuals who comprise our world, and whether that might ever be possible within a functioning collective. Are we necessarily alone and weak; would we be lost in any crowd? Might we ever strive for anything more, anything grander and more beautiful, than the fatalistic isolation of neoliberal technocracy, or the parochial violence of fascistic nationalism? Curtis’s series is full of people who have failed in their endeavours because they have misconceived the relationship between the individual and society in some perfectly commonsensical, but philosophically quite basic ways. Clearly, one key lesson from these films is that we need to start thinking about the distinction between individual and society quite differently – in the interests of liberating us from the hostile forces which, as Curtis shows, by now reign almost completely victorious over us all (I have my own ideas about how this can be achieved through philosophy – but unfortunately, I don’t have space to detail them here. Read the early Marx though, and G.E.M. Anscombe, and Iris Murdoch). History can be exemplary in this endeavour – but only through philosophy can we obtain the sort of critical distance from reality necessary to think about our world in a transformative way.
ArtReview℗Haegue Yang’s Uncanny Sculptures Lure You In℗Andy St. Louis℗Reviews℗02/02/2021℗In her largest solo presentation to date in Korea, the artist conjures up a hybrid sensibility – familiar yet foreign, inscrutable yet obvious℗The intellectualised art practice of Haegue Yang has a tendency to confound viewers with its surfeit of latent references, fuelling a lofty discursive purview for framing her work in the context of continually shifting conceptual parameters. At its core, however, Yang’s oeuvre conveys nuanced sensibilities and provokes visceral encounters with viewers across cultures, repurposing everyday materials such as clothes-drying racks, venetian blinds, bells and artificial straw to invoke imaginative excursions into the realms of science, craft, folklore and philosophy. Yang’s largest solo presentation to date in Korea explores the conceptual space between the ontology of natural phenomena and human efforts to navigate competing beliefs, desires and conditions in an indeterminate world. The exhibition title makes reference to the molecular structures of oxygen and water; despite the specificity of these chemical symbols, they remain highly abstract as signifiers, giving little clue as to the actual physical properties of either substance. It’s precisely this sort of hybrid sensibility – familiar yet foreign, inscrutable yet obvious – that Yang is so deft at conjuring in her works, luring viewers deeper into her visual milieu. Substantiating this sensibility are two groups of sculptures that exude a commanding and uncanny presence, activating divergent cognitive pathways by conflating the bizarre and banal. Yang’s Sonic Domesticus series (2020) enlarges scissors, tongs and hairdryers into imposing forms, while new works from the Sonic Clotheshorses series (2018–) are modelled after configurations of drying racks; aside from their unusual silhouettes, what makes these works so strangely evocative are the thousands of small bells that cover their surfaces. Throughout human history, bells have been used in religious rites as a means of connecting human beings to the cosmos, and in the case of Yang’s sculptures, they invest domestic forms with a sacred resonance. Other groups of works unfold similar dualities through the interplay of materiality and form. In works from The Intermediates series (2015–), Yang uses artificial straw to create shaggy surfaces that enshroud ambiguous sculptural forms drawn from folk imagery – namely, serpents and shields – and forge links between artisanship and representation. Elsewhere, venetian blinds function both as a rigid structural element and permeable internal substance in two new works from Yang’s Sol LeWitt Upside Down series (2015–) as well as the monumental Silo of Silence – Clicked Core (2017), this last rising 16m into the air and slowly rotating to assert an entropic presence that simultaneously arouses curiosity and apprehension. The exhibition is rounded out with several site-specific installations laden with multiple dimensions of meaning, some more obscure than others. And yet, the myriad references that have come to characterise Yang’s distinctive oeuvre are subdued in O₂ &amp; H₂O, and the need to parse the meaning of every single work subsides in the broader context of the exhibition. As such, one’s appreciation for Yang’s diverse presentation is not predicated on any external framework that might otherwise overshadow the viewing experience; instead, her works are permitted to speak for themselves, facilitating a mode of interpretation that is more intuitive than cerebral. 
ArtReview℗The Subverted Landscapes of Artist Merlin James℗Ana Vukadin℗Reviews℗01/02/2021℗In a recent exhibition – glimpsed between one lockdown and another – his artworks divest themselves of canvas altogether℗In a brief, wondrous interlude between one lockdown and another, Merlin James was able to travel from Glasgow to Bologna to install his show at P420, and I managed to catch it just before it was shut down. The exhibition is small, unassuming and engrossing, featuring eight works spanning 15 years, modestly sized and displaying a variety of styles – hints of James McNeill Abbott Whistler, Francis Bacon, Serge Charchoune, Giorgio Morandi. There is a familiarity you cannot quite grasp: that building you think you may recognise or the coastline you may have driven along. As the works draw you in, slightly off details emerge. In Audience (undated), heavily applied hues of black, brown and mauve acrylic outline an audience watching a stage, as two small dots of white and red stand out against the darkness – lights, perhaps, or performers. Leaning in closer, you realise that James has covered large parts of the small canvas in human hairs, some sticking out from the canvas. In Coast (2000–2), a dark, elegiac coastal scene is almost jarred by what looks like a patch, as though the artist repaired an old canvas before painting on it. James’s subject matter – mostly landscapes, buildings or partial figures – is often subverted in these subtle, mischievous ways, diverting our attention from the subject to the matter itself, the physical act of painting, and back again. Even the diminutive size of the paintings evokes the easel they have been painted on. James’s love for his medium is all-encompassing: he considers each part of the canvas as a fundamental element of the language of painting. My favourite works are his ‘transparencies’ or ‘frame paintings’, which divest themselves of canvas altogether, exposing the wooden stretcher and covering it in a fine, transparent polyester. In House and Cloud (2010), he has carved and painted parts of the bars in green and white – it almost looks like some kind of insect resting on a flower – and covered it in fine mesh, onto which he has painted a just-about-discernable house and cloud. Buildings (2012) takes transparency one step further: James working on the stretcher frame itself, carving a fantastical little building onto it. His works are that rare thing: paintings that, in a time of perpetual distraction, avoid the heavy-handed or pretentious, and retain the ability to transfix.
ArtReview℗The Best Shows To See in Singapore℗Adeline Chia℗Reviews℗29/01/2021℗From Choy Ka Fai’s exploration of shamanic dance cultures to young artists focusing on the intersection of the Internet and bodies, this year’s Singapore Art Week feels down to earth℗With COVID-19 rendering travel virtually non-existent, festivals and events that rely partially on art tourism are rethinking their priorities. The state-sponsored Singapore Art Week (SAW), running from 22 to 30 January, is also shifting gears, with more resources directed towards local audiences and artists. Its events are also embracing more hybrid formats with physical and digital components. Despite or perhaps because of the changes, SAW is still self-described in its press release as ‘the pinnacle of Asia’s visual arts calendar’. I’m not so sure: this year’s edition feels more like the shelter-in-place, loungewear-clad, receive-no-visitors version. Although that isn’t a complaint. Minus the usual parties, dinners and international jet-set flying in and hogging the attention, SAW feels down-to-earth and uncoupled from national branding and economic imperatives driving previous editions. This year, the National Arts Council, Economic Development Board and Singapore Tourism Board – joint supporters of the event – have no outsiders to impress, no pinnacle to scale. As a result, SAW can finally relax.    With over 100 events under its umbrella, SAW is a broad church, and this year, it feels even broader. There is an online .gif sticker exhibition. At Gillman Barracks, you can ‘catch’ critters designed by local artists on your mobile phone using augmented reality filters, à la Pokemon Go. In the carpark of the Singapore Chinese Cultural Centre, you can rent an electric car in a ‘drive-through exhibition’ titled Moo Moo Park, inspired by the upcoming Chinese Year of the Ox. There are also artworks along bus stops and in a train. Sure, some of these activities sound like extensions of the government’s SingapoRediscovers project, aimed at getting Singaporeans to become tourists in their own country. Some stretch the definition of art. But they also represent a redirection of funds towards local arts-practitioners of all stripes. More than 40 projects this year are new commissions by practitioners based here, the largest number yet for SAW. The quality may be uneven, but the pop-up exhibitions, often by young artists and independent curators, stand out for their range of responses to the times. Networked Bodies, curated by Ong Kian Peng, is a media-heavy exhibition exploring how bodies connect via the Internet and social media; meanwhile, Maybe We Read Too Much Into Things, curated by Berny Tan, is insistently offline, focusing on the practices of six local artists who work with everyday objects to create fey, tender installations out of mundane materials. Elsewhere, there are platforms for new voices, such as Singapore Ceramics Now 2021, The Orchid; The Wasp and the fresh grad showcase, Pivot Point. These spunky projects give this year’s SAW a decentralised feel, especially given that the week’s supposed anchor event, the S.E.A. Focus art fair, has been streamlined. Never large to begin with, the fair does away with individual booths and takes the format of a fluid, open exhibition featuring works flown in by 27 participating galleries. Overall, the fair is a low-key affair, with galleries eschewing competitive pageantry and sending in a tightly edited selection of mostly wall works. The non-2D highlights include the video installation of Singaporean artist Ho Tzu Nyen’s multipart The Critical Dictionary Of Southeast Asia (2017–), which is shown in its entirety for the first time, and skeletal rattan puppet figures by Iwan Effendi of Yogyakarta’s Puppetmoon Theatre.   The event is staged at Tanjong Pagar Distripark, a high-ceilinged industrial zone near the Keppel port area. Next to it, in another warehouse space is an exhibition about shamanic dance cultures by Singaporean artist Choy Ka Fai. Organised by the Singapore Art Museum, whose original premises are under renovation, CosmicWander is the culmination of Choy’s 18-month research trip across Asia where he spoke to more than 50 spirit mediums about their practices. The exhibition, described as a work-in-progress, features an immersive six-channel video showing the rituals of six mediums, including a game avatar he invented; a smaller video installation with other digital avatars of gods in the style of Para Para Paradise dance video games; and a straightforward documentary section where mediums are interviewed. The exhibition has its moments. At its best, it is strange, ecstatic and terrifying at the same time. It also takes the mickey out of Singapore’s national branding exercises. CosmicWander’s exhibition flyer shows a Singaporean medium, face painted red and framed with straggly wet hair, channelling the Hindu goddess Kali. The heading says, ‘DARING, DIVINE, DEMOCRATIC’ and below that, ‘Passion Made Possible’ – that latter being the tagline of the global campaign for Singapore by the Singapore Tourism Board and the Economic Development Board. Choy’s parody is a bit of a cheap shot, but would it have passed muster with the notoriously thin-skinned Singapore authorities in a year when the stakes were different, when there would be more international exposure? Who knows? In any case, it is to SAW’s credit that it accommodated the spoof – demonstrating a graciousness and spaciousness that seems extra precious during these tough times…
ArtReview℗Eula Biss Reveals the Anatomy of Middle Class Desire℗Neha Kale℗Book Review℗28/01/2021℗The American writer’s collection of essays ‘Having and Being Had’ explores how money shapes and winnows our trajectories℗Eula Biss didn’t see the point of owning property until she bought a house herself. The American essayist, lauded for her genre-crossing nonfiction books Notes from No Man’s Land (2009) and On Immunity (2014), has long valued money in terms of the time it afforded her to write, she writes here. That is, until she secured a university job, along with a raise that brought her salary to $73,000. It pushed Biss and her husband, John, also an artist, into a new pay bracket – one that could accommodate a mortgage on a brick bungalow with a view of the lake in Evanston, Chicago, a historically African- American neighbourhood. She describes the lure of becoming a landowner near the start of her searching, occasionally frustrating collection of short essays on how money shapes and winnows our trajectories. ‘I wanted to paint the kitchen Moir Gold and I wanted to plant a garden in the backyard,’ she writes. ‘I wanted to make something mine. What I wanted, more than anything was the illusion of permanence the house provided. The solid foundation, the bricks that wouldn’t blow away, the sense of security. That was a fantasy, I knew, but it felt real.’ This postpandemic moment has fast exposed permanence and security as late-capitalist delusions. Biss, who draws on the ideas of David Graeber, the late American anthropologist who famously proposed that most white-collar jobs were meaningless, concedes that owning a house also means being owned by it. John strips wallpaper off their living room. Biss prunes roses she doesn’t like. ‘The house is just passing through my hands,’ she writes. ‘It’s not a purchase, it’s husbandry.’ Yet the house is also an asset that grows in value. It accustoms the couple and their young son to a new world of middle-class comforts. Biss, paraphrasing Marx, points out that the middle class, comprising business owners and professionals with the means to make investments, is dangerous because their loyalty is divided between the workers they depend on and the capitalist dreams to which they aspire. Having and Being Had is at its best when it reveals the anatomy of this split allegiance. In clear prose, free of rhetorical flourishes, she explores the thrall of middle-class desires. She’s drawn to a brand of white paint that costs $110 a gallon and magically appears more luminous than its cheaper counterparts. These desires become purchases, which become class signifiers that feel increasingly indispensable. Biss buys a piano, the domain of nineteenth-century housewives who were expected to model ‘genteel idleness’. Biss also exposes the lie of middle-class morality, revealing its relationship to invisible labour and servitude. In Victorian England, she writes, landowning women liked to go ‘slumming’, visiting the poor and making them scrub their linens. In the essay One’s Own, she reveals that Virginia Woolf underpaid her chef, Nellie Boxall, and fired her several years after publishing A Room of One’s Own (1929). Biss isn’t immune to this irony. After giving birth, she pays a young woman, who goes by the job title ‘mother’s helper’, only eight dollars an hour to do chores while she holds the baby. Biss is fearless when it comes to excavating the terms of her own complicity, laying bare its ethical and moral dimensions. When Biss and John move into their bungalow, the American big-box chain Walmart pays them $8,000 to create an imaginary interior for a commercial aimed at the African-American demographic that can no longer afford their neighbourhood. ‘John tells all this to his friend Dan, who says, I think that’s the definition of white privilege,’ Biss writes. Here, Biss’s stylish nonstyle works to obfuscate, not illuminate. To anyone who doesn’t share the writer’s class and race, this is a self-evident truth that borrows the force of a revelation. Having and Being Had thinks deeply about the systems we take for granted, but these teachable moments can dilute the strength of its project. After all, investigating our class delusions and renouncing them altogether are two different things.
ArtReview℗Trenton Doyle Hancock’s American Antiheroism℗Megan N. Liberty℗Reviews℗28/01/2021℗The artist’s alter-superhero-ego Torpedo Boy betrays his fallible humanity℗Trenton Doyle Hancock’s paintings, comic strips, installations and objects are rooted in the mythology of the ‘Moundverse’ – a world populated by his alter-superhero-ego, Torpedo Boy; ‘Vegans’, writhing beings that have the ability to possess humans and take over their bodies; and ‘Bringbacks’, creatures of nostalgia that recall childhood memories, like the toys in Hancock’s installations. Something American, installed across both James Cohan galleries, expands this world with ink-on-paper drawings from his ongoing graphic novel, large paintings of the Vegans and Bringbacks, and paintings of Torpedo Boy and a Ku Klux Klan member.  Rendered nearly lifesize, Hancock’s Klansman is ghostly and cartoonish, a reference to Philip Guston’s own Klansmen paintings (a major Guston retrospective was recently postponed over fears that those paintings would be misinterpreted). In Hancock’s SKUM: Just Beneath the Skin (2018), Torpedo Boy stands opposite the white figure, who extends the disembodied head of a Black man. Similar heads float around them in a swirling psychedelic backdrop of thick acrylic paint, coloured paper and plastic bottlecaps. Rather than comicbook word bubbles, the characters’ conversation is shown in text cut into their bodies. ‘No no no know don’t touch that damn thing! Germs,’ Torpedo Boy says. The Klansman responds, ‘Just be just beneath the skin again!’ repeated several times on his white disguise. In another meeting in a less colourful space, the conversation continues as the Klansman offers ‘The star of code switching’ and tells Torpedo Boy, now also a ghostly white, ‘Take it. It will help you live longer,’ advocating for assimilation or code switching – the practice of changing one’s speech depending on the audience – as a survival technique. The hooded figure’s language is both seductive, like the language of white supremacy that allows it to continue to spread, and infectious like germs. The humour of their exchanges is undeniable, heightened by the cartoonish visuals. But as the exhibition title suggests, they hintat something darker about America. Hancock refuses to present a traditionally heroic superhero. Instead, Torpedo Boy is an antihero, betraying his fallible humanity; wry and at times gullible, engaged in an ongoing exchange with a dangerous figure. In Schlep and Screw, Knowledge Rental Pawn Exchange Service (2017), the Klansman offers an apple evocative of the biblical Tree of Knowledge, tempting Torpedo Boy and through him the audience as well. The figures stand on an ‘alter’ that reads, ‘All of this is you’. The desire to be heroic exists alongside a fear of the contagion of white supremacy, suggesting we are all susceptible to its lure, or at least to the human failures of apathy and inaction against it.
ArtReview℗Storytellers Who Listen: John Berger and Arundhati Roy on How To Be a Writer℗Mark Rappolt℗Opinion℗27/01/2021℗Literature as the art of smuggling out the stories of others who can’t be heard or whom no one wants to hear℗The award-winning art critic and novelist John Berger once said: ‘If I’m a storyteller it’s because I listen. For me, a storyteller is like a passeur who gets contraband across a frontier.’ He’d present you with one thing in order to talk about something else entirely. In Berger’s celebrated TV series Ways of Seeing (1972) he opens up by talking about painting in order to talk about photography in order to then say that paintings in general are not what we thought they were (having previously suggested that we shouldn’t necessarily trust him in the first place). The aim, he states, is to help us better understand the situation in which we are living. Which, in a way, is how magazines like this one write about art today (although we insist that you trust us). We pose as an art magazine, as a vehicle for the learned study and criticism of artworks, in order to write about politics, or sociology, or economics, without the danger or burden of anyone thinking that we are posing as experts in those fields. And therefore, we hope, cutting us a bit of slack if we’re indirect or imprecise, or talking in similes and metaphors rather than directly addressing the subject at hand. And, generally, artworks oblige in facilitating this. That’s partly, of course, as a result of the artworks we choose to write about and partly because artists are doing exactly the same thing. Playing at being smugglers, passeurs. (Or at their best, of course, doing it for real.) Particularly in times when everyone in the field of culture wants to pass themselves off as an ‘activist’ of some sort, however removed from the ‘action’ they may actually be. Here at ArtReview, we frame this way of writing as a ‘legacy’, because Berger was a contributor to Art News and Review (as ArtReview was originally titled) during the first decades of its existence. And occasionally we republish one of his reviews to remind readers of our fine tradition. But I’m not so sure we practise it as consciously as that would suggest. I’m not always so sure that we are so clear about what we are trying to do. It (the framing and reminding) is a less noble form of smuggling. A nod to the safety of tradition and stability when we’re confronted with the instability of an ostensibly contingent present. Back in 2016, when Berger agreed to republish an article written during the 1950s (for The New Statesman rather than ArtReview) about ‘the disastrous relations between art and property’ on the grounds that not a lot had changed since he first wrote it, ArtReview’s editors were split as to whether this was an act of solidarity or implicit critique of our complicity in the status quo. But Berger, who died in 2017, didn’t spring to mind because of a connection with legacies or stalemates. Rather because he is evoked, albeit in passing, in Arundhati Roy’s latest collection of lectures and newspaper articles, Azadi (2020). The book’s title derives from the Urdu word for ‘freedom’, which is chanted by those opposing the Indian rule of Kashmir and the ever-widening range of atrocities that come with it. And yet, it is something of a misnomer: the collection itself is largely about a lack of freedom. Most notably that resulting from the ‘unforgivable’ repression of the population in Kashmir (in a text, included here, that was originally published in The New York Times in 2017, Roy lists 70,000 dead, thousands ‘disappeared’ and tens of thousands tortured) and the blind eye many Indians turn to it. It’s about those whose freedom is denied, if you like, and those who choose willingly to set it aside. (This last conforming to what the writer W.G. Sebald – a 2018 lecture included in Azadi was delivered as part of a series at London’s British Library established in the German’s memory – described as ‘people’s ability to forget what they do not want to know, to overlook what is before their eyes’.) And more generally about the plight of a country that not so long ago (1947) won independence from colonial rule, only to end up being governed by what Roy describes as a self-imposed combination of ‘feudalism and religious fundamentalism, caste and capitalism’. In the face of all this, the essays included in this collection come out, broadly, against homogenisation and fixity and for multiplicity and fluidity. And, in a way, Berger’s evocation of the passeur is in itself an appeal for a similar type of freedom: freedom from tradition, received wisdom, narrow visions, and, one presumes, freedom from the tyranny of a single language. Berger pops up in the fourth of the nine works included in Azadi, titled ‘The Language of Literature’ (originally presented by Roy as a lecture, given in New York in May 2019). While it covers a range of topics, at its heart is a discussion about the limits of art (or in this case art in the form of literature). Or, more accurately, the limits to our perception and definition of art. Roy is discussing reactions to the fact that she spent the two decades between her first and second novels (the Booker Prize-winning The God of Small Things, published in 1997 and The Ministry of Utmost Happiness, 2017, respectively) writing non-fiction and championing a variety of social issues. On the one hand people didn’t know quite where to place her, given her apparent abandonment of a field in which she had had such dazzling initial success and being suspicious about whether or not she might have leveraged that success to jumpstart another career entirely. (Such people, at least those who wanted to redeem her two writing practices into some sort of potentially seamless whole, Roy recounts, eventually settled on the term ‘writer-activist’ to describe her, a term that suggests only seams and limits to the scope of both writing and activism.) On the other hand, her writing was subject to various learned opinions about the one form being superior to the other: fiction permanent, non-fiction ephemeral; non-fiction real, fiction fake; fiction non-political, non-fiction political. For what it’s worth, I came to her fiction through her non-fiction. But for Roy that’s not worth much. ‘Fact and fiction are not converse’, she states as a rebuttal to the superiorists. ‘One is not necessarily truer than the other, more factual than the other, or more real than the other.’ The important thing is to have a story worth telling. At this point Roy recalls ‘the first message I received from John Berger’ (yes, ‘the first’ – it’s reassuring to note that one of our greatest living writers is not above a little boosterism of the legacy variety too): a handwritten note stating that ‘Your fiction and non-fiction – they walk you round the world like your two legs.’ We live in an age, needless to say, in which politicians are the prime peddlers of fiction, and facts are the preserve of ordinary people struggling to live on the ground or people the more repressive types of government will prosecute and imprison (Roy herself has in the past been charged with sedition). The struggle, Roy suggests, is in figuring out ‘how to be a writer during these times’. For Roy, great literature is literature that’s needed (and the point here is that the same is true of art), built, as Roy puts it, through a compact between ‘writers and readers’. An echo, perhaps, of Berger’s statement about a storyteller being someone who listens. Who smuggles out the stories of others who can’t be heard or whom no one wants to hear. Who creates great art to relate the story of ordinary life. That too is the lesson of Azadi: fiction has its uses – for smuggling messages that can’t be said directly (for Roy, ‘Particularly about Kashmir, where only fiction can be true because the truth cannot be told’); but, when we can say things straight up, we should have the courage to do that too. ‘If the function of the public critic is to relate works of art to ordinary life,’ Berger wrote in an article originally published in what would become ArtReview, ‘it follows that either the works themselves are remote from that life as it is normally understood, or that the public are so confused by art that they cannot see the connections which do exist.’ The article envisioned a future in which the public would have no need for specialist art critics at all, because the public wouldn’t need them to be intermediaries between audiences and works of art. Which, as a critic, once you get over the natural fears about redundancy, would represent a kind of freedom too. To embrace being a nimble jack of all trades without posing as or worrying about being the master of one.
ArtReview℗‘Ceramic Flesh Curls with Sculpted Flames’: Julia Phillips Recasts the Human Form℗Rachel Remick℗Reviews℗25/01/2021℗The artist transforms the stainless fixtures and white walls of the gallery into a more sinister, surgical environment℗Deploying her characteristic fragmentary visual language, Julia Phillips’s most recent sculptural installations investigate the mechanics of human relationships. Mediator (all works 2020) consists of two ceramic moulds of the area of the chest around the collarbone, glazed in layered, flesh-coloured tones and mounted at either end of the crossbar on a T-shaped stainless-steel fixture. Atop the vertical support sits a microphone inside a metallic ring, its position between the two ceramic moulds implying a discourse. The title invokes the legal process of mediation as a negotiation between two parties in conflict. Yet in viewing Mediator, the viewer is left to guess who mediates between whom and what is in dispute. Maybe it’s divorce proceedings, or political debates, or arguments with family members that spin around the microphone like a centrifuge. This equivocal connection between the sculpture and the viewer, where the viewer extrapolates the sculpture’s indeterminate meaning, is critical to Phillips’s work, allowing it to function as a machinic representation of a psychological relationship. At the same time, Phillips’s use of fragments of the human form signals the embodied experience of relationships, like the chest pieces in Mediator or the clenched knuckles in Negotiator #1. These corporeal traces are reminiscent of Ana Mendieta’s Silueta series (1973–80), in which the outlines or indentation of the body implies its presence. The largest work, Oppressor with Soul, In Treatment &amp; Suppressor with Spirit, In Treatment, places such bodily fragments in a symmetrical arrangement; opposing groups of elements feature a mould of shoulders and the base of a skull mounted on a vertical pole, near a hollow mould of shoulders revealing a chest-cavity-like shape that rests on a nearby metal table. Here, Phillips pairs the oppressor and suppressor, where both are in positions of power but are depicted ‘in treatment’. One chest cavity, whether the ‘Soul’ or ‘Spirit’, is largely intact, but in its opposite, the ceramic flesh curls with sculpted flames. This tableau suggests treatments that are perhaps more torturous than therapeutic, recasting the stainless fixtures and white walls of the gallery as a more sinister or surgical environment. In her installations, Phillips dissects power dynamics, leaving only corporeal fragments or cross-sections of oppression, negotiation, mediation or observation. Yet these fleshy icons prevent any reading of the social identities of their implied bodies (racialised, gendered or classed). By avoiding such constructs, Phillips invites the viewer to imagine whose bodies might be enacting these psychological relationships – a symbolic elasticity that permits the works to act as mirrors for the viewer. In contemplating New Album, I questioned the ways in which I allow myself to be vulnerable, to conciliate or to exert power in my own interactions.
ArtReview℗Simon Munnery: Comedy as Art?℗Oliver Basciano℗Reviews℗14/01/2021℗The English comedian brings his own brand of absurd whimsy and wordplay into the gallery℗Simon Munnery’s first foray into the art-exhibition business includes a video of the comedian (and now artist) exploring a Venn diagram. The diagram features two sets: comedy and art. It’s a response to a 2006 review that described Munnery’s standup act as ‘the closest that comedy gets to modern art’. The statement was intended as a compliment. In the video (of a later standup show) Munnery uses the critic’s assessment to imagine in which of the two categories his work actually sits: “A long way from the middle of the comedy circle – like funny comedy – in fact almost not comedy at all,” Munnery explains. “But not art. And even if it became art, it would be shit art, art perilously close to being comedy.” Alongside the video hang a series of paintings also playing with the Venn motif. In one, two sets touch without overlapping. A dot captioned ‘my show’ lies just inside the ‘comedy’ circle, where it meets the circle marked ‘art’. So here we are. While never becoming a household name like the 1990s comedians he’s standing next to in one archive photo (Stewart Lee and Caroline Aherne among them), characters such as the dictatorial egoist The League Against Tedium and student anarchist Alan Parker: Urban Warrior won Munnery avid fans, not least artist Andy Holden, who cocurated this show (along with Munnery himself). His brand of absurd whimsy and wordplay translates well from comedy club to gallery. Some works admittedly come off as one-liners, even if undercut with dark humour: a painting, in which a child says ‘Please Daddy, everyone else is going’ as she drags her father towards a sign pointing to hell, has the artistic value of a New Yorker cartoon. More persuasive is Monkey Reverie (undated), a series of 11 photographs of (presumably) Munnery in a monkey costume, collaged onto a painted desert landscape so as to appear as if he is approaching the viewer. In the final picture the ape, according to a typewritten caption, ‘whips out a banana and offers it to you’. It goes on to ask: ‘What would you do? Eat the banana? Run away screaming? Or gently insert the banana in the monkey’s back passage?’ There is something dreadful in the scenario that, trading on transgression and violence, mines the dark humour of surrealism, or the absurdism present in the work of conceptualist forebears such as Bas Jan Ader or Keith Arnatt. In another video, Munnery stands in front of a similar desertlike landscape while Bob Dylan’s Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door (1973) plays. Spoofing Dylan’s famous film clip for Subterranean Homesick Blues (1965), from inside his trench coat the almost-artist brings out a series of cue cards: ‘Knock’, ‘Knock Who?’, ‘Knock Knock’, ‘Who’s There?’, ‘Knock’, ‘Knock Who?’ ‘Knock Knock’. It is a work that confounds and annoys and is all the better for doing so. Leaving the joke hanging without a punchline, Munnery enters the territory of art where, at its best, ambiguity and a lack of resolution are rightly privileged.
ArtReview℗Ross Bleckner: Painting the Inexorable Nature of Change℗Martin Herbert℗Reviews℗14/01/2021℗Once painter-laureate of the AIDS epidemic, the artist’s new works offer moments of melancholic contemplation℗In the 1980s and 90s, Ross Bleckner was the painter-laureate of the AIDS epidemic, and one mightn’t have been surprised to see his austere semiabstractions of the era, with their references to blood cells, revived to address another era of contagion. But, as the all-new canvases here demonstrate, Bleckner increasingly conflates human fragility with aesthetics, which means an emphasis on stylistic change. Here, among the first things one sees is Burn Painting (Rooms Combined to Cheer) (2020), set in a black-tiled space, maybe a shower room. A trio of flower stems heavy with blooms float unassisted like ghosts – one blackened, one multicoloured, one vanishing – and, to finish, Bleckner has assaulted the canvas with a blowtorch in a vicious, impatient update of the floral memento mori. It’s one of a half-dozen stylistic modalities essayed here. Melancholy unifies the show, counterweighted with acceptance: in the centrepiece four-panel geometric abstraction After/All/ These/Years (2020), concentric grey diamonds are steadily invaded by a single red one, moving from edge to centre, bespeaking ominous transformation over – the title suggests – a lifetime. Divided by Zero (2020) floats colourful, smeared horizontal stripes, seemingly on their way to somewhere, over a greyish void with a glowing white centre that feels about as close as these paintings get to hope. Another canvas namechecks spiritual guru Ram Dass, suggesting that Bleckner, in the solitude of his East Hampton studio, has found a Buddhist path in coming to terms with the inexorable nature of change, and has looked for ways to make static images – and, more largely, a body of work – convey impermanence. For this reason, Bleckner’s show is a downer that lightly exhilarates; it pivots repeatedly on sadness, using it as energy. In one of the most darkly lovely works, Love and Letting Go II (2020), a cornucopia of flower-heads disperses freely across a brownish canvas, most glowing and some dead, in a conflation of Dutch flower painting and the ‘all-over’ approach of midcentury American abstraction. As is typical with these paintings, the longer you look, the more consolatory colour rises out of darkness.
ArtReview℗The Hard Sci-Fi of Cixin Liu’s Cosmic Operas℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Book Review℗13/01/2021℗Whether it’s the exact way a star collapses after having a black hole shot into it, or stemming an underground coal-seam fire with liquid cement, in ‘Hold Up the Sky’, Liu is dazzlingly plausible℗The human story only really has two endings (if you ignore the one about living happily ever after). In one, everybody dies. In the other, the universe ends. Cixin Liu’s science fiction is stoic in that way, since these are the inexorable endpoints of his take on humanity’s relationship to science, technology and the cosmos. Hold Up the Sky collects the first English translations of 11 short stories mostly written during the 2000s, and it affirms Liu as the nerdish, physics-, cosmology- and engineering- obsessed writer who has won many fans among those fond of the ‘hard sf’ genre. Whether it’s the exact way a star collapses after having a black hole shot into it, or the detail of how to contain an underground coal-seam fire with liquid cement, or how much matter it takes to store every permutation of Classical Chinese poetry in atomic-scale computer memory, Liu is dazzlingly plausible. But that plausibility is only the armature for stories that aspire to the philosophical grandeur of writers like Isaac Asimov (one of Liu’s heroes). Here, human lives are tiny in the face of cosmic space and time. Liu’s stories often start out in present-day China – a dying provincial school teacher teaches his students Newton’s laws, not realising that his charges will be taken as proof of earthly civilisation, saving the planet from world-culling extraterrestrials; an anti-corruption official discovers that a superstring computer can make all history (and all crimes) transparent – and in one sense, his science fiction is Chinese in its outlook, though not because of its local particularities. Ironically, it’s because it’s now China that still espouses such an (old-fashioned) view of human progress that Liu’s work reads as contemporary and as classic (that’s to say ‘Western’) space opera. Compared to, say, the ecologism of Ursula K. Le Guin or the futurised cultural relativism of Iain M. Banks, Liu’s universe is very un-Western in its optimism about humanity’s identity and future among the stars. And in the face of final futility, it’s art that gives meaning to things – the three most whimsical stories here are of alien entities who come to Earth to play music, or sculpt, or write poetry – even if, occasionally, this results in disaster and the death of millions. This is only fiction, after all.
ArtReview℗Artists Explore the Social Presence of Blackness℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Reviews℗07/01/2021℗London’s Harlesden High Street gallery staged an exhibition-as-discussion in the wake of the Black Lives Matter protests℗Over the summer, following worldwide Black Lives Matter protests, itinerant gallerist Jonny Tanna (and his gallery Harlesden High Street) assembled a show in a vacant third-floor office space not far from where the Central London demonstrations had assembled. Tanna’s idea was to bring together artists of colour to dialogue and reflect, making, as the press notes suggest, an ‘exhibition of an ongoing discussion, exploring the engagement of art away from institutional values and frameworks’. Where do We Go From Here? is loose and informal, staged on office carpet under the glare of strip lighting. The attention to black experience and the social presence of blackness reverberates with a sense of crisis – of visibility most of all – and politics get mixed up with technology: Ibiye Camp’s mobile of painted head portraits (Polygons + Peels, all works 2020) – each a skin of paint dangling from a clip – are sensitive studies; a smartphone AR app invokes the ghostly appearance of 3D-polygon ‘masks’ that ‘attach’ themselves to the paintings in virtual space. Camp’s nearby video, Behind Shirley Research, elaborates the former work’s sources in the controversy over how AI vision fails to recognise black faces. Technology imposes on the body differently in Clémentine Bedos’s MUCOSA #3, a floor-scattering of QR codes printed as removable skin ‘tattoos’. These link to an unpredictable archive of images of white cultural icons and an older colonial racism: Michelle Pfeiffer in PVC Catwoman outfit, a white colonial holding decapitated human heads. These are pessimistic and accusatory reflections on the enduring presence of white supremacy and the desire to be released from identification – the futility of ideals of ‘colour blindness’ in the face of surveillance – searches for a way out: Emmanuel Awuni’s installation Exodus is a ramshackle platform of tarp and timber, a stage for a group of works that variously hint at mutability and disintegration: a bust of a man, dark paint dripping over it; a conchlike clay sculpture, all indefinable innards; and the tarps, painted like abstractions but perhaps only material for a nomadic shelter. Salvage is also what constitutes Randa Asma Osman’s wry, detritus-born sculptures, whose titles hint at displacements and cultural distances (Lost in Translation and The parallels between Brent and Eritrea got me…). Farrah Riley Gray’s Together, with its embroidered figures of people styling each other’s hair, from which actual hair extensions unravel, by contrast offers the only image of secure sociability and intimacy. Where do we go from here? It really depends on who we mean by ‘we’.
ArtReview℗New Life: Books to Help You Escape Lockdown Boredom℗Oliver Basciano℗Book Review℗06/01/2021℗Everyday stories in the face of world-changing events kept this correspondent sane℗There seemed to be a common consensus (well, on my social-media streams, through which I initially did far too much doom-scrolling) that, during the white heat of the first COVID-19 lockdown, people were too anxious to concentrate on reading books or any other similarly ‘productive’ activity. I worried (because social media is 99-percent worrying about saying the wrong thing) that I might appear insensitive if I noted the government-mandated opportunity not to go out had proved a golden opportunity for me to stay in and delve into the ever-accumulating ‘to read’ pile. Anyway, now, with some distance, I can admit I found it pretty productive (albeit only after I resolved only to look at the news once per day.) A highlight: ‘But behind the ramparts of Louvre / Freud has dredged the river and grinning horribly / Waves his garbage in a glare of electricity / Taxis, Taxis, Taxis / They moan and yell and squeak / Like a thousand tom-cats in rut.’
ArtReview℗ArtReview Asia’s Guide to Books to Look Up When You’re Locked Down℗Adeline Chia℗Book Review℗30/12/2020℗Asian-American racial trauma; motherhood and magic; and a manga master – an end-of-year reading list℗Known for their essay, Sick Woman Theory (2016), Korean-American artist, musician, writer, astrologer and all-round fantastic witch Johanna Hedva is enjoying a resurgence in this year of global sickness. Their widely quoted text, which draws from their experiences with debilitating illness, is a manifesto for those living with chronic conditions and disability. They have come out with a new book this year that collects a decade’s worth of writing, spanning plays, essays, journal entries and poetry that delves into ‘mysticism, madness, motherhood and magic’. For a sampler of the protean material in there, here’s an extract from their guide on craft. One of the most influential and celebrated postwar comic artists in Japan, Yoshiharu Tsuge has so far reached a limited English-speaking audience. Previously, only one other tome existed in translation – the fantastic The Man Without Talent, put out by The New York Review of Books earlier this year – and now, finally, his mature works are going to be accessible to a wider readership, thanks to Drawn &amp; Quarterly’s plan to release a seven-volume anthology. The Swamp kicks off the series, with 11 short stories from the 1960s that showcase the poverty of postwar Japan and the bleak and enigmatic imagination of the manga master. Expect to encounter a samurai’s suicide pact with his wife, an unhappy couple’s adoption of a bird in place of a child, a woman’s erotic relationship with her pet snake… Best inhaled in one seating.   In 2014, Singaporean artist and bibliophile Shubigi Rao started a 10-year interdisciplinary project themed around the destruction of books and libraries. She visited libraries and archives around the world that served as ‘flashpoints in history’, collecting stories and images that explore the book as a symbol of resistance. She plans to create five books every two years, and Volume II, published 2018, is devoted to people who defended books and knowledge, including firefighters, librarians and volunteers who fought to save books from Vijecnica library during the siege of Sarajevo. It also won the Singapore Literature Prize Creative Non-fiction in English this year. Click here to read our review. Punching the air, yelling, and pressing copies onto everyone you know – these are some of the reactions of people who have read this book. (I did all three.) Cathy Park Hong’s essay collection, which is broadly about Asian-American racial trauma, is written by someone with the language of a poet, the knowledge and incisiveness of a first-rate cultural critic, and the anger of first-hand experience. Every single essay is gold. The much-quoted titular essay powerfully names the low-key emotions of shame, depression and paranoia that characterise the Asian-American experience, describing ‘the racialized range of emotions that are negative, dysphoric, and therefore untelegenic, built from the sediments of everyday racial experience and the irritant of having one’s perception of reality constantly questioned or dismissed’. They don’t just apply to Asian Americans but to most Asians in a roomful of whites.
ArtReview℗Indulgent Westerners Far From Home: ‘The Glass Kingdom’ Review℗Max Crosbie-Jones℗Book Review℗30/12/2020℗Bangkok-based British author Lawrence Osborne’s new novel has much to say about the class divides that cleave Thai society℗In the opening pages of Bangkok-based British author Lawrence Osborne’s new novel, a gauche young American named Sarah Mullins appears modestly content. There are moments when she feels guilty for having swindled her New York employer, a famous author, out of a large sum of cash, but her attention is focused on the immediate future, namely fine-tuning her temporary new life in Bangkok. This grifter’s plan is simply to talk to as few people as possible, to ‘turn herself into a living ghost in one of the few places where a solitary white woman would be little noticed, sexually or otherwise’. But Sarah is also a repressed social butterfly eager to flutter. One morning she heads down to the communal pool of The Kingdom, the luxurious apartment complex she has chosen for its ‘air of decaying grandeur’ and proximity to the ‘paraphernalia of the hipster age’. There, while doing idle laps, she meets a dazzling luk khrueng (Eurasian) girl named Mali, who sips from a thermos of gin and tonic and slinks about like Bette Davis. ‘I can tell you’re a little shy,’ Mali says. ‘But don’t be. Come hang out with us – we’ll bring you out of your shell, I promise.’ And just like that the shell shrinks. Suddenly no longer fixated on ‘mere repetitions calculated to pass the time’, Sarah embarks on a social life with Mali and two female expatriates who live in the building: gets drunk, smokes joints, visits day spas and chi-chi restaurants, says too much. Soon this light entertainment is causing her to ‘list deliciously to one side, a loss of gravity that induced new feelings, which at first simply corresponded to what she thought was happiness’. Wrought out of taut, elemental prose, The Glass Kingdom has a lot to say about both indulgent Westerners far from home – ‘They think history is over and no longer affects them’, remarks one of Sarah’s new friends – and the class divide that cleaves Thai society. Within the mandalalike hierarchy of The Kingdom, the Thai-Chinese owner and minted residents lord it over the nosy, all-seeing staff. But most hostility is reserved for the listless foreigners, ‘the water-boatman insects skimming across the surface of a pool whose extent and nature they would never understand’. Clearly out of her depth, Sarah and her habits are soon being viewed with suspicion, and her dirty laundry traded ‘on the open marketplace of gossip’ by Goi, a cleaner who has spotted the suitcase stuffed full of plastic-wrapped dollars in the spare-room closet. As the point of view jumps and events take dark turns, some of the choices that Sarah and the book’s other shifty characters make seem irrational, be it tasting a slab of meat in a stranger’s fridge or forgetting to wash a bloodied nightgown. Yet what slowly unfolds is arguably not a noir thriller or human drama, but a cinematic evocation of the brutal vicissitudes of fate, set against a spectral depiction of a Thai uprising. Early on, Sarah notices a nearby university campus where the students are lying among the trees ‘as if by a collective trance’. Over time, these innocuous protests grow and begin to unsettle The Kingdom’s ‘dusty certainties’, the staff becoming ‘perceptively less respectful, more knowing’. Meanwhile, an intricate murder mystery plot, inspired by Henri-Georges Clouzot’s Les Diaboliques (1955), is less an isolated event than one of several ripples of cause and effect nudging Sarah inexorably towards her destiny. As in many of Osborne’s previous novels, the world he masterfully depicts – in this case, a Bangkok where an irrational yet intoxicating mix of Buddhism and animism holds sway alongside laissez-faire economics – is soon closing in, eroding his characters’ sense of autonomy through attrition. Before long, an atmosphere of menace that borders on the supernatural shrouds everything. ‘What kept her up was the way the building appeared to be awake on its own terms,’ writes Osborne. ‘There were little stirrings coming from the building’s interior. Footfalls, the whir of the service elevator, moths beating against the landing lights as they died voluntarily. Together they formed a vitality greater than themselves.’ Animals seem especially attuned to the brooding malevolence that builds and builds. Giant bats dip and wheel around the towers as storms roll in, feral dogs swarm in fluid packs around the ruins of nearby tobacco warehouses, birds sit morosely on cables ‘as if waiting for someone to make a mistake’. About midway, The Kingdom – ‘a refuge, a prison, a fantasy, and a luxury living machine all at once’ – begins to experience blackouts, its nervous system convulsing as if the spirits and ghosts that live nearby, in trees, shrines and vacant apartments, have conspired to wreak havoc. At one point, the walls ooze ‘with a curious dampness’. The comparisons to Graham Greene, often levelled on account of Osborne’s nomadic lifestyle and maladjusted white protagonists, seem manifestly glib here. The plot, commentary and atmospherics in this bleak novel are more indebted to Korean and Japanese cinema, particularly Bong Joon-ho’s Barking Dogs Never Bite (2000) and maybe even Hideo Nakata’s rain-drenched gothic apartment fable Dark Water (2002). The dystopian silhouette of J.G. Ballard’s High-Rise also looms large – as well as power cuts, dogs end up wandering the decaying corridors, and there are flowing descriptions of sordidly lavish communal gardens, replete with patios ‘filled with Chinese lions and plaster Germanic milkmaids with wide-brimmed bonnets pinned onto walls of plastic ivy’. But while Ballard’s technodisaster satire was written back when tower blocks were replacing terraced streets across London, Osborne’s novel – his first set in Bangkok, where he has lived since 2012 – is of its own postmodern time and place: part dreadful karmic parable, part metaphor for Thailand’s sickly social hierarchy. A vertical panopticon run on filthy lucre, exploitation and socio- pathic self-interest, The Kingdom’s four towers are a simulacrum of one of the most unequal countries on earth. Residents are surveilled, often by each other. Power and money are gained by observing, then amorally acting upon the secrets uncovered. Vases of yellow flowers in the lobby attest to the owner’s royalist leanings while the porous corridors are ‘conduits of lightning-fast gossip’. Ancestors dwell alongside the living. Renting an apartment in this fragile edifice just as cracks are beginning to show, chaos inching in, Sarah barely stands a chance. 
ArtReview℗Can Art Create New Worlds from the Pieces of this Broken One?℗Adeline Chia℗Reviews℗23/12/2020℗At National Gallery Singapore, artists probe sensitive subjects under a state-managed image of a harmonious, multi-ethnic society℗Five brown women have taken over National Gallery Singapore (NGS). In front of a Raden Saleh painting of animals escaping from a forest fire, they recite excerpts from Frank Swettenham’s The Real Malay (1899), one of the foundational colonial British texts responsible for the myth of the ‘lazy Malay’. (Typical excerpt: ‘The leading characteristics of the Malay of every class is a disinclination to work’.) The women perform a slow exorcism of this racial malevolence. They pray, sing, ride barefoot on the escalators. They perform in front of paintings of Malay people. The performance ends with the actors speaking about declaiming the land, unfencing the beaches and freeing the seas – an allusion to the stateless seafaring people who were native to this land. This videowork, Sekali Lagi! (‘Once Again!’), by transgender Malay artist nor, is part of the group show An Exercise of Meaning in a Glitch Season. Its earnest explorations of racial identity form one of the exhibition’s thrusts: the questioning of structures of power and privilege. As exhibitions in NGS go, this is edgy stuff. The institution showcases modern Southeast Asian art, but is less keen on cultural activism, shyly acknowledging the presence of empire in art history but never actually passing judgment. No such restraint in Sekali Lagi! Scolding, at times smacking of an amateur drama troupe’s efforts, it’s not the most nuanced work. But it at least attempts to start a timely conversation about decolonising the museum, as well as the issue of race, which remains sensitive under Singapore’s state-managed image of harmonious, multi-ethnic society. An Exercise…, curated by Syaheedah Iskandar, is one of two guest shows hosted by NGS during the COVID-19 pandemic to show solidarity with the local art scene (and fill the programming gap from the cancelled Matisse/Picasso and Nam June Paik blockbusters). The other, which we’ll come to shortly, is Time Passes, curated by Samantha Yap for Singapore Art Museum, which is currently under renovation. Both exhibitions reflect on the public health crisis – how to get through it, and what must change for the better – and feature young artists in their twenties and thirties. An Exercise is more stridently issue-led, inviting us, according to exhibition materials, to imagine new ways of building ‘a more humane future’. Racial justice, of course, plays a ‘corrective’ role in this project – eight out of the ten artists included are from ethnic minorities in majority-Chinese Singapore – as do our relationships to nonhuman species, technology and capitalism. There are 3D-modelled bodies rendered with data-moshing techniques to reimagine brownness (Priyageetha Dia, Long Live the New Flesh; all works but one, 2020), music made with plants by translating their biodata into sound (Tini Aliman, Pokoknya: Organic Cancellation) and a critique of unbridled consumerism via a collage of 1990s advertisements (Clara Lim, 3 GHz). Because this is a ‘woke’ exhibition held in a relatively conservative space, the curatorial intention is commendable. Unfortunately, the artworks do not work as hard as their captions, which namecheck a host of trendy artworld concepts like techno-animism and interspecies communication in conscientious self-narration and -justification. The art just sort of shows up, engaging dutifully with the urgencies described, but thinly, as exposition. Syaheedah says in the curatorial statement that many of the works are ‘local articulations that mirror the many undercurrents the world is grappling with in light of this pandemic’. The flipside is that they also feel like diluted or undercooked versions of art seen elsewhere. This could be due to the quick production timeline: an exhibition put together relatively quickly, showcasing new art, might not be the place for artists to deliver their best work. Meanwhile, Time Passes, as its title suggests, is the more languid show. It is inspired by the middle section of Virginia Woolf ’s To the Lighthouse (1927), where ten years were encapsulated in that one phrase. During this time- bending pandemic, where time seems to have come to a standstill, the protofeminist idea of artmaking as an act of care – towards things, oneself and others – is a recurring theme. So you have a fictional reiki healing centre (Divaagar, Render Tender); an artist documenting her removal of snails from harm’s way (Yeyoon Avis Ann, Passage Moist Beings) and flowers placed at sites of hostile architecture, such as dividers on benches to prevent the homeless from lying down (Diana Rahim, Interventions). More compelling are the artworks that make strenuous efforts of forming new worlds out of the pieces of this broken one. In his Frame(works) (2019) series of sculptures, Victor Paul Brang Tun takes apart an old rattan chair and creates new things out of it. The dismantled legs are turned into curved minimalist pipelike forms, then framed on the wall; the webbing from its seat is transformed into a small basket; and some of the cane gets bent into U-shapes and stuck back into drilled holes in a branch, forming some kind of new plant with handles. The economy with which these pieces have been recomposed, compared to the wastefulness of so much artmaking, is graceful and touching. Another type of reassembly takes place in Khairullah Rahim’s installation Rendezvous, a fabulous, impossible aquarium. In it are showerheads joined into a crown, plastic plants and silvery rhinestones studded on leaves and twigs. With remarkable compression, this aquascape exudes a powerful nighttime, subcultural energy: the shower roses suggest the public bathroom – that classic gay cruising spot – and the bedazzlement evokes ‘stoning’, where drag queens stick rhinestones on everything to stand out. Not to mention that ‘fish tank’ is slang for a type of brothel that displays women in glass cases. Seriousness is the default mode during the COVID-19 era, and both exhibitions are generally weighed down by this sense of necessary propriety. In this sense Rahim’s Rendezvous is a breath of fresh air. Made up of coded objects, it celebrates something easily forgotten in the pandemic: pleasure. 
ArtReview℗Unspooling Stories: The Drawings of Toyin Ojih Odutola℗Rahel Aima℗Reviews℗17/12/2020℗Seeing the artist’s latest New York show is like ‘eavesdropping in a café or urban park-bench, so intimate is it in its anonymity’℗The thing I will remember most about this spring’s lockdown in Brooklyn is the constant interweaving of sirens. I wondered about their lives, all those people being carried away in ambulances to become statistics, and whether they would ever return. In Toyin Ojih Odutola’s new exhibition of drawings, skin ripples sinuously, like all those sirens curving through the air, but instead of a panicky cacophony, they suggest quiet, interested interiority. Layers of mark-making accumulate, creating remarkable depth. Titled Tell Me A Story, I Don’t Care If It’s True, it features works that were largely created this year during lockdown. It was initially on view on Jack Shainman’s website this summer before opening at one of the gallery’s Chelsea locations in the autumn. Yet viewing the show online doesn’t begin to convey the way the drawings shift with the light. In person, they make you want to move around in front of them, tilting your head to capture the movement, as you might with a lenticular print. As with previous bodies of work, the show features closely cropped portraits of Black people. The subjects have a nonchalant, even dreamy air that decentres the viewer’s gaze. They don’t refuse to perform so much as find the very idea a bit boring. Even when directly facing the viewer, they appear to look past you into the middle distance. Here, the portraits are framed together with little vignettes of text in the artist’s neat hand, both mounted in apertures cut in a considerable expanse of white mat. Both writing and drawing suggest inset windows on a computer screen, or perhaps the faces and text areas that now describe a typical working day. Ojih Odutola’s works often revolve around a narrative, as in her breakout solo exhibition at the Whitney Museum in 2017, which was based on a fictionalised tale of two aristocratic Nigerian families. Here the texts range from single lines to a couple of paragraphs and switch between first- and third-person reminiscences, but manage to world-build in just a few deft strokes. They unspool the stories – and lies – that we tell ourselves, and that are poignant and prosaic in turn: a seventy-year-old woman reflecting on her art collection (‘a biography of a blessed life’), a woman viewing the dead body of someone who terrorised her when alive, so many relationships lost. Spending time with this show feels like eavesdropping in a café or urban park-bench, so intimate is it in its anonymity. It offers a curious voyeuristic pleasure that is sonic instead of scopic: not looking but listening. Sometimes the texts relate conversations like an angry phone call in For Evidence (all works 2020). In Chosen, meanwhile, Ojih Odutola imagines an exchange between a pair looking into a shop window emblazoned with ‘SALE’. One person touching up their lip gloss turns into a conversation about getting chosen and self-love. ‘Don’t worry if we had the option, we wouldn’t choose ourselves,’ says the person on the right. ‘Well… I’d choose you,’ the other replies. Throughout, there’s an awareness of being for sale (a very American story), of being seen and not seen, and of honouring ancestors. In It’ll be over soon, a pair honed in rare colour against a cobalt background grumble about their lack of visibility, while in Homeroom a bespectacled woman tries to get through the day and ‘avoid any notice of her person by anyone’, the text explains. ‘There is a disheartening supposition that our elders were somehow uninvolved with mainstream channels of visibility and their own agency,’ Always Been offers alongside a pensive woman in a pearl necklace. In Nourishment a man considers an object accompanied by the memory of a trip to the ‘Artifacts of Africa’ wing of a museum, and his mother tells him that this stolen art is his inheritance and he should have pride in it. When he wants to escape the discomfiting lesson by getting food, she tells him she is amazed he still needs nourishment after time in the room. I imagine the same conversation happening in this gallery – except here the art isn’t looted colonial spoils. And I imagine the same conversation one day happening in museums around the world, filled with repatriated objects; a story I long to tell myself even if it doesn’t come true.
ArtReview℗The Self-Deception of Sung Tieu℗Alex Quicho℗Reviews℗17/12/2020℗The Vietnam-born, London/Berlin-based artist constructs subjecthood via astrology, entrapment and MRI brain scans℗Visitors to Sung Tieu’s What is your |x|? enter a false room nested inside the bare gallery, where the floor is plushly carpeted, fluorescent lights blinding white. At either side, eight prison doors, bolted immovably onto interior walls, lead the eye in towards the room’s gleaming centre. A great steel wheel mounted on the room’s far face and, according to the exhibition notes, weighing over half a tonne, encloses a mirror laser-engraved with Tieu’s astrological birth chart; a surrounding relief of interlocking gears mimics a vault’s locking mechanism. Already, there’s an overture of entrapment, but the experience is playful, not oppressive. Viewers glimpse themselves decussated by a map of Tieu’s planetary aspects, appearing suddenly among the circumstances of her birth. Tieu’s past exhibitions saw her pepper carceral installations with family memorabilia, subtly asserting her authorship across tightly-focused geopolitical analysis. In What is your |x|? political allegory is dialled down so that the dual presence of artist and audience are free to intermingle. The title belies an interrogation of ‘the self ’; in mathematical translation, what is your ‘absolute value’? The steel doors, facing one another, could be seen as a hall of clouded mirrors where infinity is yet foreclosed. Closer inspection reveals texts printed on the opaque glass of the doors’ useless peepholes; written with the help of an astrologer in the directive second person, the short paragraphs offer archetypes – the Depressive, the Narcissistic – that beg for personal identification. ‘Your motto is “only those who perform deserve love”,’ reads one. ‘You are constantly bedevilled by self-doubt’, reads another. The doors feel linked to Tieu’s past series Exposure to Havana Syndrome (2020), in which prison mirrors were laser-engraved with MRI scans of the artist’s brain under the influence of a sonic weapon, allegedly deployed against US diplomats in Cuba. Materially twinned, both works offer a tension between comprehension and opacity. The scans render Tieu’s brain in intricate detail, but are illegible to casual observers; the astrological forecasts are interpretable by all but their generality impedes deep understanding. What may seem like a departure from the affective qualities of state violence actually entrenches Tieu’s pet themes: the felicitous construction of subjecthood, the workings of top-down systems that shape our fates. By taking as her subject the fashionable vagaries of self-reflection and self-deception, Tieu presents our desire for complete recognition – for the formation of an ‘absolute self ’– as the trap that it is.
ArtReview℗Humiliating the Ego: Faris Heizer℗Adeline Chia℗Reviews℗16/12/2020℗In the Singaporean artist’s first solo exhibition, misanthropic paintings pull the pants off of corporate capitalism℗Daily life is a nightmare in Faris Heizer’s first solo exhibition. In these paintings, everyday routines such as taking the train, having dinner and using a public toilet become scenes of Dostoevskian torment. Bodies are dysmorphic, spouting multiple limbs and heads, or merging into each other. The backgrounds, janglingly delineated or crazily tiled, are one churning headache. (Or anxiety dream. There are a lot of toilets and people caught with their pants down.) In the COVID-19 era, where everyone’s trying desperately to look on the bright side, the Singaporean artist provides a dose of good, clean misery. The recurring motif in the ten acrylic-on-canvas paintings, all dated this year, is the figure of the salaryman. Dressed in suits or white long-sleeved shirts, he is a figure of loathing and fascination. In a horde, these white-collar workers are portrayed as a Hydra-like mass. Morning Rush (all works 2020) shows a ‘bouquet’ of commuters at a turnstile, squeezed at the bottom, bodies and limbs indistinguishable from one another, heads fanning out. As individual specimens, they are trainwrecks. Job Hunting’s white-collar guy is thickset and balding, puffing away on a cigarette, rushing somewhere. Pantless. Under his black blazer is a pair of boxer shorts. This exhibition would leave a nasty taste – ie boho artist sneering at boring nine-to-fivers – if there wasn’t some degree of empathy.And Faris can relate. His suffering is writ large in sludgy works that express a range of negative emotional conditions, from minor unease to full-on hysteria. His paintings are, in the symbolic and expressionist traditions, coloured by his interiority: think bleak grey-brown palette, brutalist handling of bodies as melty lumps, fractured surfaces and so on. In this world, forced socialisation is a form of torture. In Compulsory Dinner, wavy lines reminiscent of noxious fumes divide the crowd into silos. Small Talk features two men conversing with their pants around their ankles. Forget toilet reading; this is toilet conversation. Better, Faris’s misanthropy has range: it can go into more operatic registers. Take the shrill zigzag background in Monkey Business, where the proverbial beast with two backs seems literally made by the colliding bodies of two men. They are watched over by another guy whose presence is known only by his shoes and trousers, both brown. What the salaryman represents is open to interpretation. The soul crushed by corporate capitalism? Humiliated by the superego?The master-slave relationship also translates into situations of malevolent sexuality. Take the man in a gimp mask, either getting a cigarette held to his lips or having it stubbed out on the face (Punching Bag). This is a breakout exhibition of a new talent in Singaporean painting. Before this exhibition, Faris, a recent graduate from the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts, had a couple of small works turn up in group shows. They were mostly murky tableaux of fantastical scenes and with a generalised angst. With his current subject, he has found something specific to say, and he brings his technical flair to bear on it. He has opened a rich vein. 
ArtReview℗A Forgotten Manga Artist: Kuniko Tsurita℗Fi Churchman℗Book Review℗16/12/2020℗In comics drawn between 1966–1980, the manga artist reflects on the role of women in Japanese society and its youth in existential crisis℗For women, navigating the publishing scene of the counterculture during the 1960s was notoriously difficult. Rife with sexism and macho attitudes – despite the liberal and progressive ideas male editors and publishers professed to have – the publications produced by the underground often only made space for women in administrative capacities. In Japan, underground manga publications ran much the same way – at least so it seems in the essay that accompanies The Sky is Blue with a Single Cloud, a long-awaited celebration of popular alternative manga magazine Garo’s (1964–2002) lone regular female comic artist, Kuniko Tsurita. Kuniko’s contributions – she was the first woman (at the age of eighteen) to publish comics in the magazine, in 1965 – have been an underrecognised part of the canon of Japan’s comic artists more widely, something that comics historian Ryan Holmberg and editor and manga researcher Mitsuhiro Asakawa endeavour to rectify in their afterword on her life and work. Eighteen of Kuniko’s comics are collected here, published between 1966 and 1980, with themes largely reflecting on Japan’s youth in existential crisis via bleak but humorous stories in black-and-white drawings that shift in style (from simple straightforward lines to more detailed images), while retaining a visual language through severe use of high contrast. Read from right to left in the traditional Japanese style, the words spoken in the comics are translated here officially for the first time by Holmberg. Despite the wide range of topics related to Japan’s youth culture, sexuality, society and politics that appear in this collection, it is the stories that tell of the societal challenges facing women that bind it together: in ‘Woman’ (1966) the prehistoric female protagonist is beaten and rejected by an ex-lover, becomes a single mother and is ostracised by her community; ‘The Tragedy of Princess Rokunomiya’ (1967) reflects on arbitrary beauty standards; a female figure in ‘My Wife Is an Acrobat’ (1974) literally performs nakedly – apart from high heels – in front of a man. Offering far more than a glimpse into Kuniko’s professional career, The Sky is Blue… reflects on her satirical subversion of social and cultural ideals of femininity in an industry dominated by men.
ArtReview℗Contagious Horror: Why You Have to Watch Brandon Cronenberg’s ‘Possessor’℗Philippa Snow℗Opinion℗10/12/2020℗A bloody sci-fi fable about for-hire bodysnatchers visualises the interior struggle between host and parasite in dazzling, merciless scenes℗In Brandon Cronenberg’s first feature Antiviral (2012), celebrity is a sickness everybody wants to catch. The Lucas Clinic, whose procedures sit precisely halfway between cosmetology and epidemiology, offers its starstruck clients the pleasure of being infected with the viruses of very famous strangers. An employee of the clinic, Syd March – played by Caleb Landry Jones, resembling a cross between a sex-offender and a Pre-Raphaelite angel – has been secretly injecting himself with the leftovers in order to smuggle them out for sale on the black market. In the first scene of the film, a curly-headed boy consults with March about the possibility of being infected with a viral strain – something minimal but permanent – from a blonde actress with a toothpaste-advert smile named Hannah Geist. “She’s somehow perfect, isn’t she?” March nods, waving his hand at a video-screen of Geist in a red dress. “Her eyes seem to reach right beneath your skin and touch your organs. Touch your stomach. Touch your lungs. Gives me the shivers.” They decide on her personal, exclusive strain of herpes simplex, on the left side of the mouth, as if the boy had kissed the actress. Cronenberg may or may not be making a sly little joke on John Updike’s iconic, oft-repeated aphorism: ‘Celebrity is a mask that eats the face.’ Actors and actresses, assuming they are talented, make their careers by getting underneath the skin of other people, squeezing up against their stomachs and their lungs, and giving audiences the shivers. In this sense, Cronenberg’s sophomore film Possessor (2020), a merciless, bloody science-fiction-horror story about for-hire bodysnatching, is a logical heir to the pitch-black satire of Hollywood fandom seen in Antiviral. What could be a better metaphor for acting, and for method acting in particular, than the ability to literally occupy another person’s mind and body? Tasya Vos – played by Andrea Riseborough – is a dead-eyed assassin who carries out her hits while wired up to a machine that sends her reeling, sometimes glitching, into the unconscious form of whichever unfortunate person happens to have convenient access to her victim. Her boss, Girder, calls these bodily invasions her “performances,” an idea borne out by the scene in which Vos watches Colin Tate, the man she intends to slip into, and mimics him as if she is perfecting an impression: “Do you wanna go eat?” she repeats, pitching down her voice, her face an inscrutable mask. “Do you wanna go eat? Let’s just go walk and find somewhere. Let’s just go walk and find somewhere.” “It’s a real honour,” another operative tells her later, as if he were angling for a starlet’s autograph. “I was a huge fan of the Elio Mazza stabbing.” Then again, Possessor can be read in many different ways. Because the film is about what we assume must be dizzying sums of cash being exchanged for the right to fill a stranger’s head with new and dangerous desires, we might also find ourselves able to interpret it through the lenses of war, capitalism, advertising, television, or the internet. Cronenberg himself, in a recent interview for The New York Times, suggested that it might well work as an analogy for the failings of contemporary democracy, for social media, or for ‘the way we perform for ourselves and the relationship between self-perception and performance’. Because the film’s central hit involves Vos taking over a male body, and because while she is hidden in that body she has sex with Tate’s girlfriend, it is also very possible to read Possessor as a queer film – in its unedited form, Possessor Uncut, Vos is fleetingly depicted with an erect penis, in an erotic, hallucinatory sequence that sees both characters slipping in and out of psychic dominance. In its earliest scenes, which show a young black service worker being bodysnatched and forced to stab her rich employer, then shot by a group of cops, the film flirts with another, darker subtext, before shrinking back in horror. Some things, even for a cool provocateur like Brandon Cronenberg, are beyond satire. It is fortunate that the director – white and rich, Hollywood royalty ­– recognises that he has his limitations.  What else reaches right beneath your skin and brushes up against your organs? The obvious answer, circa now, would seem to be ‘coronavirus.’ Antiviral, with its vision of a world in which virologists work out of clinics on the high street, prefigured the degree to which epidemiological processes would so visibly become part of our day-to-day lives; Possessor, with its dazzlingly inventive scenes rendering the interior struggle between host and parasite as blunt, exterior violence, literalises the sensation of being driven to one’s death by something hidden in the blood or in the brain. Both films are Cronenbergian in the truest sense, which is to say that they closely resemble the films of Brandon’s father, David Cronenberg. In describing the long effects of COVID-19 on my body in the eight months since contracting it, I have invoked Cronenberg Sr. more than once – the raised and burning veins, the sunken black eyes and grey skin, the on-and-off inability to remember loved ones’ names and simple verbs, all conspiring to convince me that I am not quite myself. That Possessor has been released in the midst of a pandemic is purely coincidental, but it does not lessen the unpleasant feeling that it and its predecessor, Antiviral, make an ideal double bill for a new era ruled by real-life body horror. Those who thrilled to Netflix streaming Steven Soderbergh’s 2011 Contagion in mid-March, watching it hungrily until it became one of the service’s most popular offerings, will no doubt take some perverse pleasure in the possibility of seeing Possessor as another film about a virus: a dark fable in which those who survive do not do so without being changed, and those who die do so disgustingly, wetly, and viscerally. It is, whichever way you slice it, a provocative, unsettling movie – a grand Rorschach blot whose black shapes bleed into the brain. It sticks around, grim but seductive, like a cold-sore from a very famous actress. 
ArtReview℗Quietly Seductive: the Art of the Late Elisabeth Wild℗Francesco Tenaglia℗Reviews℗10/12/2020℗At Karma International, Zürich, Wild’s work offered glimpses of possible presents and futures℗Elisabeth Wild’s European solo debut is nothing if not quietly seductive. Quietness, nevertheless, was not typical of her lifestyle: born in post-Habsburg Vienna between World Wars, Wild fled with her family to Argentina during Nazi Germany’s annexation of Austria. Under the shadow of Juan Perón’s policies, in 1962 she escaped again, to Basel, only to (eventually) return to South America during the mid-90s, joining her artist daughter Vivian Suter in Panajachel, Guatemala. A tropical shell, tossed about and occasionally endangered by severe weather, indigence, world events and local crime organisations, she died earlier this year, aged ninety-eight. In Guatemala she had adopted geometrically inclined papier collé, snipping from art, fashion and architecture magazines at a time when the modernist diatribes the technique once ignited were long distant. Displacements, appropriations and recontextualisations had by now naturalised montage, as had the cut-and-paste aspects of home computers and visual pop culture. If anything, Wild was inadvertently closer to the aesthetics of hauntology – popularised circa 15 years ago and deriving from a neologism by Jacques Derrida – which sees in collage a device for extracting unexpressed, ‘spectral’ potential in narratives of the past. As showcased here, Wild’s work also offers glimpses of possible presents and futures: her arrangements depict an angular and quasi-abstract world in which social housing flirts with postmodernism; a carnivalesque brutalism has prevailed and landscapes are populated by totemlike structures. The compositions, all untitled, render an otherworldly, intimate synthesis of the major avant-gardes of the century she spent across the Atlantic, liberating the constitutive pieces of the collages from glossy context and temporal situatedness. The show’s curator, Adam Szymczyk, who first championed Wild in a duo exhibition featuring her and her daughter’s work at Kunsthalle Basel in 2014, has arranged this show as an orderly picture gallery spreading horizontally and vertically on an aquamarine, window-facing wall – a nod to the artist’s taste for lively backdrops – in what seems an allusion to a calendar (Wild made one work per day, as if to mark the passage of time). Or it could resemble a surreal, intimately personal panorama to be glimpsed through metaphorical ‘openings’ in a boundary wall.
ArtReview℗Folktales and Tragedies: Thao Nguyen Phan℗Fi Churchman℗Reviews℗04/12/2020℗The Vietnamese artist tells the story of cyclical human destruction through local folklore and traditions of reincarnation℗Stretching around 4,350km from the Tibetan Plateau to its delta in Southern Vietnam, and running through China, Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam, the Mekong River has the world’s second highest aquatically biodiverse system (after the Amazon). In Vietnam, the river, known as Song Cuu Long (Nine Dragon River), provides an abundance of freshwater for the country’s fisheries and aquaculture, one of its biggest industries alongside rice agriculture, while the nutrient-rich silt carried down through the myriad waterways fosters the fertile landscape. It’s from this river, often described as the lifeblood of the region, that Ho Chi Minh City-based artist Thao Nguyen Phan’s latest (and ongoing) project, Becoming Alluvium (2019–), springs. Comprising a 16-minute video, from which this exhibition borrows its title, a series of lacquer-works and silk paintings (Perpetual Brightness, 2019) and Phan’s most recent lacquerwork, Delta (2020), the project plays with fact and fiction in order to question the sources from which we receive our information, against the backdrop of human and ecological threats facing the river – the latter described by Phan, in an accompanying monograph, Monsoon Melody (2019), as ‘the river of Buddhism’, for its regional connections to Tibetan, Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism. The single-channel video Becoming Alluvium (2019) plays out in three rounds of reincarnation, told through footage of the river and its verdant banks, archival illustrations and prints, and animated ink paintings. The story starts with two brothers who drown – the elder reincarnates into the Irrawaddy Dolphin, the younger into a water hyacinth. In subsequent reincarnations they return as a writer, a ferryman, a rat and finally a princess, who upon becoming aware of her vanity and greed, evaporates into the river. Perpetual Brightness is an installation of six dark-green lacquered frames (made in collaboration with artist Truong Cong Tung, using plant- and soil-based materials) stacked in rows of three. The back of the frames together depict the Mekong river branching into its estuary at the delta in silver leaf, while the front serves as a support for the latest instalment of Phan’s brightly coloured watercolour paintings on silk. A procession of insects carry instruments; a group of spritelike young people shower mangrove roots with water using irrigation equipment; and crops grow from the bodies of naked figures before a looming dam. The lower panels form a triptych depicting a dead Irrawaddy Dolphin (a species that the industrialisation of the waterway has now rendered critically endangered), its head held in the arms of a boy in mourning while a halo of small children pour wine onto its carcass. Drawing both video and painted narratives from a combination of local folklore, Buddhist customs, the 2018 collapse of Laos Saddle Dam D and the ensuing flood that killed many and displaced thousands, as well as the literature of Marguerite Duras and Italo Calvino, to tell the story of the river’s continued generational destruction, Phan paints an evocative and visually beautiful if depressing picture: it’s not hard to make the connection between the rapidly growing hydroelectricity industry and the slow strangling of the Mekong. The question is, when lessons are never learned, at what point is there nothing left to reincarnate?
ArtReview℗‘Cut Out the Grievous Bullshit’: the Story of Beau Geste Press℗Oliver Basciano℗Book Review℗02/12/2020℗The 1970s DIY publishing outfit, founded in rural England by Mexican émigrés, produced collaborative projects with international artists℗Writers, artists or anyone dependent on gatekeepers to get their work noticed will sympathise with the motives behind the Beau Geste Press, a DIY publishing outfit founded by two Mexican émigrés, the married artists Felipe Ehrenberg and Martha Hellion, and art historian David Mayor in rural England in 1971. In a 1972 letter to Transgravity magazine – reproduced in a new comprehensive history of the press, Beau Geste Press (2020, ed. Alice Motard) – Ehrenberg explained, ‘The main reason we set up our press was to cut out the grievous bullshit about submitting work “for consideration”; and the ensuing stress’. It’s no surprise that a distrust of authority underpinned the enterprise: the couple had fled to Britain after escaping the 1968 Tlatelolco massacre, in which as many as 300 demonstrating students were killed by Mexican authorities. After briefly staying in London, they moved to Devon, renting a farmhouse that would become the headquarters of the small-run publishing house.  This catalogue raisonné, stemming from a recent retrospective at the CAPC in Bordeaux, chronicles the press’s growth from publisher of the founding trio’s Fluxus-inspired projects to one inviting contributions from friends and peers internationally. Ehrenberg produced a bundle of games packaged in a disposable-tampon bag that first year; a year later, the press had published a book for Carolee Schneemann that included essays by the artist, a comic strip documenting her 1970 performance for the Fluxus Fluxorum Festival and a game ‘to be played by couples’. Lacking funding, they did eventually turn to existing structures and the ‘bullshit’ Ehrenberg feared. In one of the accompanying essays, Chilean artist Cecilia Vicuña, also in Britain, and on the run from CIA-backed tyranny in her homeland, connects the British Council’s withdrawal of funding for her 1973 book with Beau Geste to Pinochet’s coup. Withdrawn because the council had decided she was ‘not doing “art” but “politics”’, the grant was only reinstated after younger members of the British Council’s staff threatened a hunger strike. The press disbanded in 1976 as the artists, each growing in recognition, concentrated on their own work. But its nonetheless prodigious output, assiduously collected and annotated here, serves as an inspiring reminder of the possibility of escaping the artworld establishment.
ArtReview℗Artist Sammy Baloji Considers the Shaky Ethics of Colonial Collecting℗Digby Warde-Aldam℗Reviews℗02/12/2020℗In his latest solo show in Paris, the Congolese artist tackles the connoisseurs who brought DR Congo’s cultural heritage to Europe℗Nothing in this exhibition is as it seems: everything has a double meaning, speaking for former colonised and former coloniser in separate visual languages. For two decades, Congolese artist/academic Sammy Baloji has investigated his country’s cultural and political history. This latest, gripping chapter focuses on the shaky ethics surrounding colonial collecting and exhibiting, addressing both the connoisseurs who brought DR Congo’s cultural heritage to Europe and the historically voiceless people who created it. On entering, you’re confronted by a vitrine containing a traditional hunting horn from Baloji’s home province of Katanga. It’s pockmarked with runic scarification, seemingly ornamental but based on a writing system devised to be unintelligible to colonisers. Furthermore, Baloji commissioned this elaborate, supposedly ‘African’ mark-making from metalworkers in Belgium – an allusion to colonial bureaucracy, which required that hunting permits were applied for not in DR Congo but in Brussels. Photographs taken by German anthropologist Hans Himmelheber on a 1939 expedition to Katanga are enlarged and printed onto tall mirrored panels. This specialist on Congolese art was relatively enlightened for the time; nevertheless, we see him carried on a litter by local porters. X-ray scans of objects he collected – rare minerals, ritual sculptures – are printed over his photos, implying that these clinical transparencies can tell us about the original objects’ material composition but not their symbolic value. Your own reflection in the mirror might be an accusation of complicity or an invitation to participate in the discussion. As ever, though, there’s an added dimension: mirrors are significant in Katangese spirituality, being an integral feature of divinatory Nkisi figures. Elsewhere, there’s a projected film that presents writer Fiston Mwanza Mujila reciting Kasalas – prose poems that serve as oral history in Katanga – about its tragic past; an archive of photos and text on a huge touchscreen; and an extract from Chris Marker, Alain Resnais and Ghislain Cloquet’s 1953 film Statues Also Die, in which footage of well-heeled gallery goers admiring African artefacts is juxtaposed with a voiceover analysing what it means to look at such sculptures and masks. Where a European might derive aesthetic pleasure, the film suggests, they would likely be blind to the objects’ layers of meaning. Here, Baloji essays a sense of what that meaning is: he knots these disparate threads of cultural misunderstanding into a taut visual shorthand, articulating the problems of displaying colonial-era collections and suggesting how we might eventually overcome them.
ArtReview℗Painter Henry Shum Navigates the Subconscious℗Ysabelle Cheung℗Reviews℗25/11/2020℗The Hong Kong artist contorts conventional genres of portraiture, landscape and religious imagery℗The typical Annunciation scene heralds the springtime conception of the Messiah; not so in Henry Shum’s 2020 rendition. This is something more ambiguous. The Virgin Mother, falling back to the floor, is painted in rusted, muddy ochres; the face of the archangel Gabriel – who is perched on a tree like a bird – is blurred and inscrutable. Around them, patches of cyan and mysterious rhizomic shapes seep into the image. The 12 paintings in Shum’s Vortices, his debut solo show at Hong Kong’s Empty Gallery, contort the conventional genres of portraiture, landscape and religious imagery, upbraiding the fixed traditions that surround them. For example, the two figures in Woman and Child (all works 2020) immediately evoke the kind of tropes found in the maternal portraiture of classical Madonna and Child paintings, but on the evidence of the title, it is unclear whether the female is even the baby’s mother; similarly, the pastoral vista of Memory of a Landscape seems generic until you begin to puzzle over its orientation, the algae puddles at the top of the canvas confusing clouds with water. These subversions are connected to the artist’s treatment of oil paint, which he dilutes into thin washes that evoke the lambent, abstracted ink paintings of the postwar New Ink Movement in Hong Kong, in particular the works of Lui Shou-Kwan. Yet even these references to certain influences are deliberately muddled. The giant mythologised creature carrying two figures in Ancient of Days (Descending Elephant Fish) is ostensibly a reference to similar spiritual imagery from the Qing dynasty, yet it is mounted within a recessed physical archway next to Annunciation, making both paintings appear more like sequential images in a faded church fresco. Here, Shum equalises European and Asian art history canons, essentially dismantling the constructed notion of one’s importance over the other.  In these canvases, we also see hints at more subconscious terrain. Shum’s figures are translucent and embryonic, their presence ambiguous among trees, mountains and lakes. As in a dream, we wonder how we arrived at certain scenes: in Revolution of Night we witness one figure holding another around the neck, unclear whether they are escaping danger or whether a crime is being perpetrated. This sense of dream logic is further embedded through architectural elements: two archways in a cloisterlike passage, newly constructed for the show, lead only to dead-end walls, and several of the paintings feature similar archways or brick partitions, complicating the viewer’s perception of place in the exhibition. Are we looking into our own psyche, or out into the world? Shum seems to suggest spiritual communion between ourselves and the cosmos in the portallike corridors and in the glowing orbs hidden across multiple canvases, which appear like celestial moons or earthbound eyes. 
ArtReview℗Nalini Malani’s ‘Animation Chamber’ Crackles With Emotion and Energy℗Fi Churchman℗Reviews℗25/11/2020℗The Indian artist creates a dizzying immersive experience with her latest commission at London’s Whitechapel Gallery℗“Feel better,” commands a female voice accompanying an animation of a black-and-white scraggily-drawn person. Blue and red lines loop around and eventually obscure the figure, who collapses face-first under the words ‘I am exhausted!’ “No matter,” says the voice. “Try it again.” The figure gets up. Indian multimedia artist Nalini Malani’s latest animated drawings (shown in one room, a nine-channel installation projected across all four brick walls to create what the artist calls an ‘animation chamber’) consist of multiple scratchy figures, faces and scenarios collaged together with quotes from writers, educators and historic figures including Milan Kundera, Veena Das, Martin Luther King, Jr, Marcel Proust, Samuel Beckett and more. The 88 animations overlap, tumble over and encroach on one another in a cacophony of images and accompanying soundtracks. Each brief sequence loops a handful of times, and words appear and disappear so fast it’s easy to miss a beat. There are grim faces, angry eyes and anguished gestures; two figures reach out towards nothing while the words ‘Waiting for Godot’ flicker beside them; a woman’s disembodied head lies on its side, eyes closed; a man gouges at another figure’s eye sockets; in a fraction of a second a silhouette of a person raises a club and blood splatters (except you can’t quite tell if what you saw is really what you saw); as another person drags themselves along their stomach, a sheet of sign-language instructions appears in the background asking the titular question ‘Can you hear me?’; and while words like ‘Endgame’, ‘Watch Out!’ and ‘I miss you’ are spelled out, other words are spoken aloud: Have you not had enough?Of what?Of this stink. Malani began creating these diarylike animations (in what she calls a series of notebooks, though they are all drawn using an iPad) in 2017, and combined here they speak to themes that have long motivated her, such as violence and power surrounding sociopolitical issues in India including gender, class and race, as well the current threat of COVID-19 (‘Stay Safe’ in red cursive script accompanies an animation of a girl jumping a rope) and the ongoing environmental crisis. The space crackles with emotion and energy. It’s what I imagine standing inside a mind to be like: watching synapses blossom into thoughts, images and meanings. And the harder you try to grasp at them, the faster they flicker out of focus. 
ArtReview℗How Grace Jones Turned Her Body Into a Living Artwork℗Aaron Juneau℗Reviews℗25/11/2020℗From Andy Warhol’s Interview magazine to collaborations with Keith Haring, the icon has given herself up for continual reinvention (without ever fully relinquishing control)℗Grace Before Jones: Camera, Disco, Studio at Nottingham Contemporary offers a shimmering insight into the life and work of an icon whose shrewd manipulation of her own self-image enabled her to glide between the worlds of art, fashion and popular culture, taking aspects from each and leaving her enduring influence behind. Iconic images of Jones punctuate the exhibition: her face as pure iridescent surface cutting through a void of black in Anthony Barboza’s 1971 portrait; Grace with clenched gold teeth for Hans Feurer’s 1974 Vogue Hommes cover; a grey velvet-shawled, rosy-cheeked, illustrated Grace for Andy Warhol’s 1984 Interview magazine. These act like silk-strewn parentheses between works by artists, fashion designers and photographers who inspired, were inspired by, or otherwise share with Jones an ability to capture all the complexities of race, gender and identity while challenging their historical constraints and prejudices. Collaborations with the likes of Keith Haring and former partner Jean-Paul Goude present Jones as a living artwork, her naked body painted with Haring’s signature thick white lines, or photographically hand-spliced and reconfigured to accentuate her extremities and impossibly long limbs. Her body here is a hyper-sexualised, ‘ultrablack’ canvas, always in direct and unapologetic confrontation with a Western obsession with racial difference and the exoticisation of the African figure; images that stare straight back at the colonial gaze. These are interspersed with ‘behind the scenes’ film clips – Jones getting her hair cut while discussing her own public image with her hairdresser, backstage at the New York Palladium with Deee-Lite in 1991, where Jones takes it upon herself to direct the photoshoot – demonstrating that, even in more intimate moments, whenever a camera is present Jones is always performing to uphold (and add layers to) her public persona. Throughout, artwork by Richard Bernstein for Jones’s late-1970s Sigma Sound Studios albums and fashion editorial illustrations by Antonio Lopez show how she gave herself up for continual reinvention (without ever fully relinquishing control). Unfinished dividing walls reminiscent of 1970s loft parties are lit sporadically with electric-blue spotlights, interrupted by podiums displaying elegantly draping dresses by Azzedine Alaïa and set to a soundtrack of Jones’s complete discography looping one song per day, forming a cacophonous disco backdrop. With its two halves and eleven ‘chapters’, each covering an aspect of Grace – ‘Interviews’, ‘Pills’, ‘Podiums’, ‘Grace &amp; The Machine’, among others – the exhibition is as much an experience of Grace Jones, analysing all she embodies and represents, as it is a biographical portrait. What might first feel like an assault to the senses is however a highly considered and complex investigation into this multidimensional character that mirrors the controlled, perfectly ordered excess of Jones’s own persona. 
ArtReview℗‘A Fleeting Moment of Perfect Stillness’: the Paintings of Matthew Wong℗Ben Eastham℗Reviews℗25/11/2020℗A show at ARCH, Athens presents a selection of preparatory gouaches made by the artist before he passed away last year℗There is something like abandonment in the paintings of Matthew Wong. His watercolours and gouaches on paper, hung in an even ring around the elegant white cube of this nonprofit space on the fringes of Greece’s National Gardens, convey the feeling of dissolving into a landscape. Their stylised scenes are naïve – women looking out to sea, silhouettes against the sunset, deserted parasols on empty beaches – but the best of them stimulate the paradoxical experience of a fleeting moment of perfect stillness achieved through intense contemplation. Big Wave Bay (all works 2019) is divided into two roughly equal planes by a horizon line, over which a tangerine sun is partially obscured by the solitary pink cloud in a mint-green sky. The flatness of the powder-blue and ink-black splodges representing the titular scene undermines the illusion of perspective that a horizon line naturally generates, and so the composition initially reads more like the vertical cross-section of a body of water than a window onto a receding landscape. The absence of pictorial depth – and its implication of time in the suggestion of real space – contributes to the near-ecstatic tranquillity of this breaking wave. Yet above it flutters a bird, its wings blurred as if moving too fast for the mechanics of painting to capture, and the spell is broken. Big Wave Bay introduces the viewer into a series of fantastic landscapes imbued with so self-contained a sense of their own reality that you sometimes wish that a breeze might blow through the gallery. Pink Dawn depicts a faceless figure encircled by tree trunks that support the heavy purplish lid of a forest canopy. The dense foliage is mirrored at the bottom edge of the painting by a grey block that serves no obvious representational function but traps the composition between the jaws of a vice. A conventional image of escape – the return to nature – is recast as one of entrapment. The nightmarish distortion evokes the oppressive atmospheres found in the work of Edvard Munch, and works such as Moon Rise are so heavily indebted to the Norwegian artist’s Moonlight (1895) and Young Woman on the Beach (1896) as to suggest homage. Indeed, it should be acknowledged that part of the initial attraction of Wong’s work is its comfortingly close resemblance to the work of artists ranging from Hokusai (Mount Fuji can be glimpsed, incongruously, behind a leafless tree) to Henri Rousseau or André Derain. Dreamlike scenes are conjured through counterintuitive fauvist colour selections and pointillist techniques. That this lack of aesthetic sophistication sometimes spills into cliché can be forgiven given that these works are introduced as preparatory works for a residency in Athens planned for this summer. That Wong died by his own hand in October last year at the age of thirty-five, shortly after completing these pieces, inevitably colours any reading of them – and lonely figures in desolate landscapes do not discourage straightforward biographical interpretation – but shouldn’t obscure their impersonation of the sublime. In standouts such as The Gloaming, the separation of colours into bright swabs and patches generates a glitter that unsettles the orders of distance that the brain tries naturally to impose on a path winding through a wooded landscape. The eye is bounced around the surface of the paper, and the particulars of the scene dissolve into an all-consuming play of colour and shape. The sense of a solid form evanescing into the interplay of unstable elements is exaggerated by the soak of watercolour into paper. When the colour is mixed thin, bodies bleed into the landscapes around them. The effect is pantheistic, though less in the sense of the Romantic imaginary – of an electrifying life-force running like an invisible wire through all creation – than in that of the Buddhist concept of sunyata, a state of undifferentiation that underpins the purely illusory differentiation between things. The sailboat of A Voyage on the North Sea is not crushed by the waves but seems on the verge of melting into them. There is energy in these works, but it is so thoroughly diffused as to approximate perfect emptiness.
ArtReview℗Sex, Drugs and High Finance: What HBO’s ‘Industry’ Tells Us About Meritocracy℗Momtaza Mehri℗Opinion℗18/11/2020℗Alienation is the soundtrack to Mickey Down and Konrad Kay’s cutthroat drama about the inner lives of investment bankers℗In a 1982 episode of the BBC’s arts documentary series Omnibus, a leather-jacketed Bob Hoskins incredulously points to the redevelopment epidemic ravaging the South Bank. “It makes The Long Good Friday look like a story out of Winnie the Pooh”, Hoskins half-jokingly recalls the British gangster flick with its depiction of Thatcherite freewheelers and mafiosos.  Today, the City maintains its stranglehold and Londoners continue their tradition of riverside lamentation. Co-produced by HBO and the BBC, Industry (2020) is the latest cultural offering dissecting the inner lives of banking’s masters and mistresses of the universe. The TV drama series – the brainchild of Mickey Down and Konrad Kay, a writing duo with a background in finance – follows a cohort of young graduates vying for coveted positions at Pierpoint &amp; Co., a fictional investment bank. In the first episode (directed by executive producer Lena Dunham), a vignette of interviews introduces us to the graduates. Harper Stern (Myha’la Herrold) is a throbbingly eager New Yorker who believes the world of high finance is the closest possible thing to a true meritocracy. She is the outsider leading us across its tightrope. Some candidates are jittery, others are breezily confident. Gus (David Jonsson) plays third fiddle to two figures in his mother’s life: Jesus Christ and Margaret Thatcher. “One is the reason we’re all here and the other is a carpenter”, he quips with the kind of relish only an heir to the ‘86 Big Bang could muster. A louche Etonian with political ambitions, Gus is the exact kind of person I imagine would end up as Britain’s first Black gay prime minister in our hellish timeline. Likeability is inconsequential. Industry encourages us to consider what drives these characters into a world, and wage bracket, that will so markedly distance them from their peers. Harper does not reveal her job to potential roommates unless pressed. When she does, she is met with unwanted hippy-dippy anti-capitalist sermonizing. At work, fellow interns – who are also women, and amusingly lacking in self-awareness – imply that a Black woman like her must be a diversity hire. She ignores them. Financial intermediaries may resist geographical boundaries, but succeeding in Harper’s world requires walling yourself off. Friends are made in the process of not wanting to make friends. And Industry is at its sharpest when it oscillates between this tension and the inevitable spasms of release, depicting characters who are never more than a moment away from a career-making high or a nervous breakdown. They secure deals with the same clients who sexually harass them. Then treat themselves to a night at a luxury hotel.  I often joke with a friend of mine –  a quintessential finance broette – that the artworld often feels more socially exclusive than her world. Miserly unpaid internships and familial connections lubricate one’s path to creative success, even as galleries sanctimoniously don their liberal costuming. There are more state-educated, council house-raised colleagues at my friend’s jaunty dinner parties than at the literati soirées I attend. Amidst my friend’s banking milieu, I find myself struck by the exploitative banality of the creative industries which shape so much of, but rarely measure up to, our societal conversations around inclusion. The 1980s saw Thatcher’s regulatory loosening immediately inject a burst of cosmopolitanism into the City’s veins. Working-class upstarts, foreign investors and global citizens stormed the gates. Top spots were no longer reserved solely for old chums who attended the right public schools and wore the right shoes. These changes were the backdrop to Serious Money, Caryl Churchill’s 1987 play where traders jostle in rhyming couplets through a satirical whirl of insider trading, corporate takeovers and murder. “One thing one learned from one’s colonial masters / One makes money from other people’s disasters”, a cocoa importer named Nigel proclaims, speaking at the intersection of new blood and old tricks. And Industry pries into these antagonisms simmering behind all the varied accents, passports and racial tick-boxes. Characters like Robert (Harry Lawtey) use hard drugs to numb class rage. Early on, a deep feeling of working-class inadequacy leads to overcompensation and, finally, tragedy. I kept thinking of how the only banker in the United States imprisoned as a result of the 2008 financial crisis was the Egyptian-born Kareem Serageldin.
ArtReview℗Manifesta 13 Marseille Review: Gut Punches and Odd Notes℗Digby Warde-Aldam℗Reviews℗16/11/2020℗Can the self-styled ‘nomadic art biennale’ – with its socially-engaged mission – withstand the weight of its own contradictions?℗In November 2018 two tenements in the impoverished, densely populated centre of Marseille collapsed, killing eight people and making around 800 homeless. It was a catastrophe that alerted residents to chronic failures in the way their city was governed: the conservative local authority, it transpired, had been enabling a process of managed decline, allowing the housing in Marseille’s poorer quarters to fall into disrepair while ignoring tenants’ complaints and failing to make crucial repairs. That the majority of the district’s inhabitants came from immigrant backgrounds only added to their sense that they had become the victims of an administratively engineered conspiracy. This tragedy looms large over the latest edition of Manifesta, which was entering planning stages just as the collapse occurred. The self-styled ‘nomadic art biennale’ has always explored the social context of its host cities, but in this instance there was an added urgency. The latent social issues that suddenly exploded into municipal discourse in the wake of the disaster ­–­ institutional racism, homelessness, inequality and gentrification, to name a few ­– are explored countless times across the 20-plus venues of the exhibition’s sprawling official programme, which takes the visitor on a whirlwind tour through crumbling public museums, project spaces and repurposed industrial structures, and repeatedly attempts to prove that it is more than a glib contemporary art event with a side order of social platitudes: a reasonable description of the previous Manifesta, in Palermo. The best projects here tackle the political concerns highlighted by the 2018 calamity head-on. Algerian-born architect Samia Henni’s display at the Musée d’Histoire de Marseille, a local history museum improbably located in a 1990s shopping centre, sees her plastering its walls with oral histories from Marseille residents that testify to institutional police racism, as well as maps and statistics explaining the corrosive effects of urban mismanagement. In one damning instance, we learn that the Marseille police force – a body with strong ties to the Pied-Noir community (French colonials born in Algeria who returned to France following Algeria’s independence) – spent decades failing to solve the murders of Algerian nationals; arrests were only made when the killers were caught in the act. Another gut-punch comes courtesy of the biennale’s single best segment, a show themed around the variable meanings of ‘home’ at the Musée Grobet-Labadié, a former haut-bourgeois townhouse converted into a museum. Martine Derain presents a series of photographs of empty rooms on Marseille’s Rue de la République, a once-bustling street rendered silent when its inhabitants ­– again, mostly from immigrant backgrounds – were forcibly evicted to make way for an as-yet-unrealised redevelopment project. Footage of protests by a local residents’ association plays out on a TV screen, providing a frenetic contrast to the eerily serene interiors of the vacated spaces. Elsewhere among the bourgeois furnishings of the Grobet-Labadié, the show turns its eye on America. Cameron Rowland presents part of an ongoing documentary project in which he explores the electronic monitoring of individuals paroled from the US prison system and the profiteering agenda of the contractors tasked with enforcing it. Attached to the wall is an example of the kind of handheld monitoring device used to surveil prisoners on probation, alerting them to curfews and no-go areas: if its instructions are violated, the user faces a return to incarceration. The cost of surveillance is paid for by the prisoners themselves, meaning that the now-widespread law enforcement practice is a lucrative industry. Quite how common this kind of monitoring has become is spelled out in documents displayed alongside: nearly four million people are currently on parole in the US; and some 45 percent of inmates entering prisons in the US have been sent down for electronically detected parole violations. Equally impressive is the biennale’s satellite educational programme, which showcases the archives of various local activist groups. So far the programme has presented an impressively diverse selection of causes, from a pioneering LGBTQ rights collective, to a local hip-hop group that for years campaigned to have a street renamed in honour of a murdered colleague. Filled with vitrines packed with significant documents, film projections and installations, the former cafeteria that serves as a base for the programme is a perfect articulation of the identity Manifesta likes to project: intelligent, inclusive and resolutely contingent. There are disappointments, too. Some are beyond anyone’s control, not least the cancellation of a planned project at the Musée Cantini by Marc Camille Chaimowicz, who was forced to pull out due to COVID-19 travel concerns. Other failings are less fathomable. Over at the Palais Longchamp – a preposterous Second Empire wedding cake of a building housing the city’s Musée des Beaux-Arts – the prevailing seriousness is offset by Lebanese artist Ali Cherri’s daft totemic sculptures, created from recycled taxidermy animals and light-industrial objets trouvés; interspersed with the museum’s Baroque hunting scenes, they strike an odd note. If this was intended as light relief, it doesn’t really work. Perhaps the most instructive project of all plays out in the courtyard of a slightly down-at-heel musical conservatory, where Mohamed Bourouissa has created a truly disorienting sound installation based on the coded vocal signals Marseille drug dealers use to alert each other to the presence of the police. Watching musical students eating their lunch as the discordant soundtrack plays out immediately puts you in the position of the flâneur, observing at a remove. You wonder what the dealers pursuing their business beyond the conservatory walls make of it all.  This brings us to the complications of this biennale. There is a strangely self-conscious tone to this Manifesta – the official literature constantly reminds you that there is only so much art can do in the face of social upheaval and global pandemic – and small wonder: ever since Marseille won the bid to host it in 2016, there has been a degree of local hostility. Associations of the sort profiled by the educational programme have complained that municipal funds that might otherwise have been available to them were siphoned off to pay for an art event of minimal significance to Marseille residents. Despite the team’s best efforts, this sentiment has never entirely dissipated. Furthermore, despite Manifesta 13’s focus on the ruinous effects of thoughtless ‘urban regeneration’ schemes, events like this one play their role in enabling the kind of gentrification they condemn. In fairness, the curators – the ICA’s Stefan Kalmár, the V-A-C Foundation’s Katerina Chuchalina and Alya Sebti of Berlin’s Ifa Gallery – will happily discuss this in person. They have done an impressive job given the shit hand they’ve been dealt. Nevertheless, you’re left wondering quite how far an explicitly socially conscious initiative like Manifesta can withstand the weight of its own contradictions when faced with unignorable tragedy. The next edition, in Kosovo, will test this to an even greater extreme. 
ArtReview℗The Self-Awareness That Haunts Artist Dana Schutz’s New Paintings℗Tom Denman℗Reviews℗16/11/2020℗The 2017 Whitney Biennial controversy is a presence felt behind the exhibition Shadow of a Cloud Moving Slowly at London’s Thomas Dane Gallery℗Walking into Dana Schutz’s exhibition (her first solo show in London), I felt as if I were interrupting something. Like Frankenstein’s monster, Schutz’s ghoulish subjects seem to exist beyond their creator’s – and the viewer’s – control. While much of her work to date has depicted the human body, as weird-looking as Schutz’s humans are, the characters in this exhibition of 12 paintings and six bronze sculptures are mainly creatures of her own devising, and their puppetlike appearance lends them an uncanny sense of automation.  The figures stare at you, avert their gaze or shut their eyes as if ashamed to be seen, or are frozen mid-motion or in some absurdist posture or configuration. I had the sense that if I turned away they would carry on with whatever they were doing. In the sculpture Atlas (2019) and the painting Everything and Nothing (2020) the same owl – a bird known for its acute eyesight and as a symbol of knowledge – is chained to an eyeball, emblematising the predicament of all the figures in Schutz’s mad world: their existence, dependent on being seen, is also their imprisonment. Completed in the last couple of years, the works on display date from after the major controversy that attended the inclusion of Schutz’s painting Open Casket (2016) in the 2017 Whitney Biennial (a painting based on the image of the black teenager Emmett Till, murdered by white racists in 1955, lying in his casket), and the heightened, frenzied self-awareness in these pictures is a quality that distinguishes much of Schutz’s work after this watershed.  Schutz was already drawn to the subject of shame, spurred by the election of Donald Trump in 2016 (a man ‘without shame’, as she told The New Yorker), and her work has always shown a predilection for jarring colours and grotesque figures, often entangled in conflict. But while the political climate might explain the dystopia in her recent paintings, which have less of the brightness and humour of her earlier work, it is hard not to imagine that the public humiliation she experienced in 2017 also had an impact. It seems to surface in the ashamedness of her subjects, the evasion and disaffection manifest in the mutinous vitality of the materials and the feeling that the artist has relinquished her autonomy to the art. The work offers no reprieve; there are no points on which the eye can rest. It’s as if the paint and the bronze were rebelling – against the artist and against us.
ArtReview℗How the ‘Suits’ Came to Rule the Artworld℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Book Review℗02/11/2020℗A new book offers insights into what goes on behind the closed doors of arts institutions’s boardrooms℗John Tusa has spent much of his professional life since the 1980s in the UK’s arts ‘establishment’, first as the head of the BBC’s World Service, then as managing director of London’s Barbican Centre, and just as much time serving on the boards of others. What goes on behind the closed doors of the boardroom is rarely public. Yet governance (confirming that an organisation is doing what it’s supposed to) has played an increasingly crucial role in the life of arts organisations over the last 30 years. Galleries, concert halls and museums today depend on a mix of public funding and private giving to produce a public good that has little to do with ‘making money’. Tusa, as one of his interviewees puts it, is a man with ‘the heart of a luvvie and the mind of a suit’. On Board (Bloomsbury Business, 2020) is an unusual sort of career memoir in the guise of a study, or a how-to guide. Tusa’s reflections of serving on seven different boards (three of them as chairman) over 25 years are oddly captivating – even weirdly entertaining – for their accessible retelling of how personalities, institutional realities and ethical principles tangle in the otherwise obscure, apparently bureaucratic politicking of the ‘suits’, understood as the foundations of the ‘luvvies’’ outward success. From his initiation as trustee of the National Portrait Gallery (and its ambitious gallery expansion during the early 1990s), to the triumph of the British Museum’s game-changing ‘Great Court’ transformation in 2004, via the lows of trying to steer the financially troubled and chaotic English National Opera during the late 1990s, through to chairing the University of the Arts London UAL, the UK’s largest grouping of art and design colleges), Tusa’s is a story of good and bad combinations of chairman and chief executive, of well-selected trustees versus indifferent or disruptive ones, and of the meddlings of external forces, usually government departments and funding bodies. As far as user’s guides go, Tusa’s advice is great wisdom born of long experience, and anyone finding themselves in the role of arts trustee should read it. In summary: take time to select a director; don’t let trustees meddle in running things; advocate for your organisation to the outside world, be diligent in scrutinising it internally; don’t lose sight of the accounts; don’t let trustees buy influence just because they’re donors. Above all, you’re there to serve. But On Board is also, inadvertently, an account of the way cultural organisations have evolved over the past three decades, and how the mix of commercial and creative independence that characterises present-day organisations took shape as the state slowly retreated from direct supervision of cultural institutions. In Britain that was kickstarted, as Tusa notes, by the Conservative government’s drive to move national cultural institutions out of direct governmental control during the early 1990s. As successive administrations insisted that organisations run themselves professionally, and find more of their own funds, a whole culture of governance (and a whole class of trustees and patrons) burgeoned. Tusa writes mostly approvingly of this shift towards having business-minded people more part of the infrastructure; this, perhaps, was the price that Tusa’s generation decided to pay to secure greater creative and cultural autonomy for the arts sector. And yet… In one of his end-of-chapter summaries (in the manner of a management guide), Tusa insists that ‘money should not buy privilege on a board’. But as the recent controversy over board interests in the UK and US has shown, the interests of monied trustees threaten to consume the culture of arts institutions. This is the endpoint of the marketisation and commercialisation that began during the 90s. Elsewhere, Tusa congratulates himself and his colleagues at UAL for their job of expanding, unifying and centralising that disparate federation of once-independent art colleges. Many now watching the wheels come off the debt-driven, commodified and precarious culture of art education driven by well-remunerated ‘suits’ won’t share Tusa’s enthusiasm. But in a sense, it’s not his fault. It is the forces of professionalisation and marketisation that have defined the evolution of the cultural sector, and even the best governance can do little to change that.
ArtReview℗How Comic Books Can Make History℗Fi Churchman℗Book Review℗29/10/2020℗Tian Veasna’s ‘Year of the Rabbit’ is a gripping tale of fleeing the Khmer Rouge℗In his first graphic novel French-Cambodian illustrator and writer Tian Veasna, born in Cambodia just days after the Khmer Rouge seized power over the country in 1975, tells the story of his family’s struggle to escape, tracing their evacuation from Phnom Penh, through their forced relocation to labour camps, to their desperate attempts to reach a refugee camp on the border of Thailand. Along the way, family members die or are ‘disappeared’. Maps, useful ‘tips’ for survival and statistics divide the chapters: from these we learn that the route to Thailand is long and treacherous, that you can trade one bar of soap for two kilograms of rice, that nearly a third of the country’s population died in four years. Told through detailed drawings, the images are skewed towards blue, green and sepia tones, the cool colours curiously offsetting the violence and horrors perpetrated by the Khmer Rouge. There are scenes in which Veasna’s uncles wade through a trench of human remains, their eyes wide with fear; a boatful of people are massacred, the river’s water turned red; and a man recalls the violence and torture he endured at a Khmer Rouge prison. There are grippingly tense moments where his parents look like they might be caught, arrested or killed in similar situations, but are saved at the last minute by small human kindnesses: an old peasant stops Khmer leaders from forcing them onto that fateful boat, a Khmer chief who lets them live peacefully in the labour camp after Veasna’s father (a doctor) treats his gravely sick child, a poor villager who lets them shelter in his hut as they travel towards Thailand. A comic book might not be the most obvious venue for an education in these human atrocities. However, the combination of powerful imagery, personal stories and few but carefully chosen words make for an affective and human-centred way of recording tragedies that the often dispassionate and objective prose of traditional history books struggles to achieve.
ArtReview℗Industrial Chemicals Have Become Our Friend: Siân Newlove-Drew at Brockley Gardens, London℗Oliver Basciano℗Reviews℗28/10/2020℗Anxious art is coupled with a DIY venue offering optimism ℗This feels like a post-pandemic (or rather, pandemic-concurrent) show in every sense. Magic Craic (2020), a single installation, features around three dozen standing plastic bottles placed haphazardly on the gallery floor, their labels removed, but which look like they once contained pop or mineral water. Whatever drink they once contained has been replaced, the bottles now half-full with various new liquids whose garish colours look distinctly unappetising. My guess, from their consistency and the way they’ve foamed on being poured in, is that they are cleaning liquids. Inside some, but not all, can be found twigs and foliage. Surrounding the bottles are three angled floor mirrors of the type found in shoe shops. A poetic text provided alongside the installation includes the lines ‘And every bead of condensation my own. Blown into, huffed’. Sure enough, over the liquid, one can discern the residue of the artist’s breath captured in the sealed bottles (an assumption confirmed by the gallery). So, a COVID-19 diary: the importance that hoarded disinfectant came to have in our lives in 2020 (weapons against possibly contaminated objects), the viral threat contained within the trapped breath; the natural elements a reminder of our government-mandated turns round the local park. This might seem an overly literal interpretation on my part – the spectre of coronavirus infects one’s mental state, and certainly the title, references to ‘huffing’ and the presence (according to a materials list) of hemp powder might suggest alternative, trippy, or therapeutic readings – but for me the hall of mirrors taps into the anxiety of lockdown. A familiar sense of bewilderment and claustrophobia, the disorientation and anxiety, suggested obliquely in the way the bottles are reflecting sloping downwards away on all sides. The work raises the disconcerting notion that industrial chemicals have become our friend against a natural foe as the synthetic colours of the cleaning liquids overpower the subtler natural colour of the organisation element; an inversion of ‘nature equals good, synthetic bad’.  Yet perhaps even more timely is the context in which the work is shown. Brockley Gardens offers something akin to optimism among the misery. Housed in a domestic garage in suburban South London, it is a DIY affair going since last year, set up by two young artists who met at art school. The programme features their peers and tutors (Newlove-Drew graduated from Camberwell College of Art in 2019). Viewing is by appointment. The fears that Newlove-Drew effectively referenced in her installation have had massive social repercussions, including the showing of art and its economy, so while major museums falter under the strain of social distancing regulations and the market faces a bleak future, it might be a moment for low budget endeavours to flourish. If that were the case, then the new normal might not be so bad. 
ArtReview℗‘Girls Against God’: Jenny Hval’s Genre-Bending Novel, Reviewed℗Mark Rappolt℗Book Review℗28/10/2020℗The author kicks against the pricks of a male pantheon℗‘Blasphemy protects us from the moral fables we grew up with,’ writes Norwegian musician and author Jenny Hval in this genre-bending novel, ‘blasphemy renounces anything that requires our submission. It shows us the cracks in this reality, through which we can pass into another, more open meeting place.’ Part feminist manifesto, part horror story, part film script, part coming-of-age tale, part recent Norwegian social history, Girls Against God documents its narrator’s rebellion against the moralities, orthodoxies and patriarchies of the Norwegian south, set between the twin poles of white (picket fences) and black (Norwegian metal – ‘self-expression for insecure men who want to return to a time when they could have been strong’). What begins with dressing as a goth and cursing at school morphs into witches’ covens and fantastic demonic, cannibalistic banquets. Along the way Hval segues into the role of language (Norwegian, but also English) as a tool of both suppression and liberation, and the role of digital technology in the same. And is haunted by Edvard Munch’s 1894–95 painting Puberty, which depicts a naked girl, her legs clenched, perched on the edge of a bed. When she first sees it, having struggled through a crowd of gawpers in Oslo’s National Museum, it’s a form of pornography, but on reflection that changes: ‘Maybe the girl from Puberty, and all naked young women in all paintings, are actually sitting there hating. Hating the painter, hating their boring gloomy life, hating the king and the president and the bishop and the prime minister and the authors and society and their own place in it.’ Over the course of the novel, the author kicks against the pricks of a male pantheon that includes Knut Hamsun, Ernest Hemingway, Raymond Carver and David Foster Wallace (and the perception of artmaking that they embody), and Little Boy, Fat Man and the Manhattan Project (‘a mushroom-shaped erection fantasy’). ‘I want to be in a place where I don’t have anything to hate,’ the author writes. It’s never quite clear if she succeeds. Or, for that matter, wants to.
ArtReview℗What’s the Point of Borat?℗Tom Whyman℗Opinion℗27/10/2020℗In ‘Borat Subsequent Moviefilm’, Sacha Baron Cohen’s grotesque Kazakh journalist returns to an America that no longer hides the depths of its racism℗Jewish folklore tells of the story of Judah Loew ben Bezalel, the great rabbi of Prague, who at some point during the sixteenth century is said to have created a golem, a sort of automaton, out of clay from the banks of the Vltava River. The mighty golem protected the Jews of Prague from pogroms and the threat of expulsion: but then one day, the rabbi forgot to deactivate it ahead of the Sabbath, and his creation went on a murder spree. Mankind was not careful with its creation – as a result it ended up performing the exact opposite function to that for which it was created. The golem was deactivated permanently, before being hidden in the attic of the Old New Synagogue. One day it might be restored to life, if the situation is ever urgent enough to justify it. Perhaps this story can help illustrate the relationship between Sacha Baron Cohen and his own most enduring creation. When the comedian’s fictitious Kazakh journalist Borat first rose to prominence as a side character on Da Ali G Show (2000–2004), he seemed a thing of brilliance: a lewd, grotesque clown, whose strange combination of naked prejudice, naive vulnerability, and creepy sexuality seemed able to disarm almost anyone he encountered, exposing just how casually and uncritically sexist, racist and, in particular, anti-Semitic attitudes lurked just under the surface of polite, liberal society. But already, by the time we reached peak Borat, with the release of Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan in 2006, the basic contradictions of this creation were obvious. Here was a character who – for all the purported anti-racist impetus behind Baron Cohen’s performances – ended up appealing on a mass scale to the public whose racist attitudes he exposed by, well… saying and doing racist things. Here was a film that depicted a festival called the ‘Running of the Jew’ in which a man in a ‘Jew’ costume lays a ‘Jew egg’. That portrayed Borat’s native Kazakhstan as a nation of clueless, patriarchal morons among whom it is normal to wash in water someone else is currently pissing in; who keep disabled people in cages and habitually fuck their own sisters. And the most famous moment of which involved Borat wrestling naked in a hotel with a big fat guy. One can feel better for laughing by bearing in mind Baron Cohen’s stated intent: but let’s not pretend there isn’t more than one sort of audience for this. Borat’s creator has always been a panderer as well as a provocateur. So, what has compelled Baron Cohen, in the year 2020, to bring down his grey suit and thick moustache from out of the attic; to travel across America saying outrageous things in an Eastern European accent once more? (I mean: leaving aside the presumably very tempting financial gains, and also the fact that nothing he’s done in the past decade has been funny). Unfortunately, on the evidence of Borat Subsequent Moviefilm (2020), I’m not sure he really knows the answer to that himself. On a superficial level, one might think: well, back in the day, Borat exposed a lot of implicit racist (and other prejudicial) attitudes amongst the American public. Now, these attitudes are a lot more open and explicit – not least, at the highest levels of government. Surely it’s Borat’s time to shine! Borat, plus Trump, during a pandemic… you can see the cogs turning in the producer’s mind. (The two even have history: Borat was seen defecating outside Trump Tower in the original movie). But then… that’s just it, isn’t it? Borat worked as a character in the context of a society that was still able to pretend it wasn’t incredibly racist – if prejudicial attitudes are able to be voiced, constantly and openly, in public, then we don’t really need an Eastern European stereotype to expose them. And of course, Baron Cohen struggles with this anyway because he is already incredibly famous: in the original movie, he had to focus on pranking unsuspected members of the public, because the celebrities he used to be able to access were already wary of being the butt of the joke; in this one, he has to go around in a fat suit because otherwise he gets heckled in the street. That said, the film’s recognition of Borat’s celebrity does lead to perhaps its funniest moment: when Borat goes into a costume shop to source a disguise, and discovers a ‘Stupid Foreign Reporter’ Halloween costume – an ersatz version of himself. Initially, I thought, perhaps the film was going to attempt a subtler, deeper critique. Essentially, the plot (expressed largely through the underwhelming scripted segments that the film, unfortunately, has been forced to over-rely on – Baron Cohen has never really been able to do scripted comedy) hinges on Borat trafficking his fifteen-year-old daughter Tutar (played by the excellent Maria Bakalova) as a bride for Mike Pence. This has the basis for a powerful satire, in a political context in which elite child sex-trafficking is at the heart not only of the ongoing scandal surrounding the paedophile financier (and sometime Trump BFF) Jeffrey Epstein, but also (not unrelatedly) the QAnon conspiracy theory. Borat even has a son named Jeffreyepstein, and spends the lockdown months crashing with some Trump supporters who think the Clintons like to drink human blood. But Borat Subsequent Moviefilm struggles to shine any new light on the infamies it documents. The plot culminates with Borat, having failed to gift his daughter to Pence, attempting to give her to Rudy Giuliani instead, entrapping ‘America’s Mayor’ in a compromising position that has already become infamous. It’s a righteous humiliation, and the scene is, to its credit, very funny – but in context, it needed to be more than that. This is what everything is supposed to have been leading up to, how all the preceding crudity and offensiveness is justified – but all Baron Cohen and Bakalova really achieve is making Giuliani – a man who everyone already knows is a shithead, and who both has and will face no real consequences for a long career spent being a shithead – look like a shithead. At one point we even see the film performatively downgrading its own expectations of itself, as Borat and Tutar trawl through a rolodex of alternative Trump hangers-on they might target, concluding that each would be unrealistic until eventually they settle on the gullible Giuliani. Likewise, it is chilling when Baron Cohen is able to get service staff to easily and casually discuss how many gypsies a gas grill could kill, or write ‘Jews Will Not Replace Us’ on a cake. It is very funny to see him walk into the annual Conservative Political Action Conference, ‘fitting in’ by dressing as a member of the Ku Klux Klan. But one wants to see Baron Cohen try a more detailed sort of inquiry. Are these actually things the staff (for instance) are OK with, one wants to know, or are they just terrified that if they start a fight with a customer over it, they’ll lose their already precarious jobs? Baron Cohen as Borat is perfectly able to do work ‘raising awareness’ of prejudice – but this is a world in which we are constantly assaulted by a crippling, overwhelming level of awareness. As an audience, we need more: but Baron Cohen seems unable to provide it. The film’s release has been very deliberately timed to coincide with the election, and it ends with the very specific injunction to ‘Vote!’ Ah, one thinks, the old Democratic magic: as if simply participating in civic institutions is the One Neat Trick we all need, to reverse the trajectory of the crumbling empire, ridden with hate and injustice and conspiratorialism, that we have just seen Borat stumble through.
ArtReview℗Suspended Between Past and Future: Brian Dillon’s ‘Suppose a Sentence’, Reviewed℗Ben Eastham℗Book Review℗26/10/2020℗The author’s exercise in literary criticism is ultimately about love℗‘Every sentence’, says Brian Dillon, in the opening sentence of his book about sentences, ‘was once an animal, says Emerson.’ Dillon’s sentence is descended from Ben Marcus’s epigraph to The Age of Wire and String: ‘Every word was once an animal – EMERSON’. The reader might wonder if both ‘Emerson’ and ‘EMERSON’ were related to Ralph Waldo Emerson, who in 1843 told a lecture hall including Walt Whitman that ‘Every word was once a poem’, two years before Simón Rodríguez declared that ‘Every word is an epitaph’. This intertextual in-joke illustrates the modifications by which literature evolves. Bad writers deface the sentences they inherit and good writers make them into something better, or at least something different, says T.S. Eliot, illustrating the point in his Four Quartets: ‘every sentence is an end and a beginning, / Every poem an epitaph’. The author dies ( – BARTHES) but the sentence persists. And is apt, as Dillon concludes, to ‘go skittering away’ from its maker. Suppose a Sentence is composed of 27 short exegeses of sentences that Dillon has plucked from their contexts, has pressed like flowers into his notebooks and desires to show us. Their sources range from John Donne (‘Wee have a winding sheete in our Mothers wombe…’) to Fleur Jaeggy (‘Paper storage, fragments of delirium eaten away by dust’) and they inspire feelings in the author running the spectrum from chaste technical appreciation to amorous devotion. Ultimately, this is a book about love. And if falling in love with a sentence is like marrying the Eiffel Tower, then bear in mind that no collector could love a work of art like a fetishist loves a sentence ( – BATAILLE). Each quotation is displayed at the top of each chapter like a shoe on a plinth or a body on a slab, to be tried on or taken apart. Gertrude Stein’s ‘concrete, plain and apprehensible’ constructions remind us that ‘words are also things’, and Dillon marvels over the means by which they are animated. Literary criticism is inherently ghoulish (schoolchildren daydream through Eng. Lit. safe in the knowledge that the answer is ‘death’), and the dissection of these sentences borders on the macabre. On the frequent occasions that Dillon is overtaken by enthusiasm for the prose machinery – ‘The inversion in those first five words!’ – he resembles a professor of anatomy falling into a cadaver in his enthusiasm for a beautiful medial colon. This is no bad thing. Sentences are distinguished from things – shoes, corpses, clichés – by the way they unfold in time. And if reading a sentence is, as Dillon puts it, ‘like waiting for a photograph to develop’ (the lover is the one who waits – BARTHES), then this picture never fixes. That reading is a process of becoming is reinforced by the abstraction of these quotations from their contexts. To embark on a sentence by Thomas De Quincey with no indication of what he’s talking about is to set off into the unknown. You don’t catch the byzantine patterns of his prose until you’re half-a-dozen clauses deep and must reorganise the memory of those that came before in order, at the end, to make fleeting sense of the whole. The reader is suspended between past and the future, looking backwards and forwards, constituting the meaning as they move through the writing. Roland Barthes haunts this review because he’s all over Suppose a Sentence, and Dillon inherits from the French writer his intense attention to the moments in which ‘one substance becomes, or is revealed to be, another’. ‘If’, as Dillon says, ‘every sentence written is a sort of ghost’, then note that he takes for his first example the spooky ‘O, O, O, O’ that follows Hamlet’s famous last words (‘the rest is silence’) in the Folio edition, before circling back to end the book with Rousseau’s anecdote of a girl who gets no further in her writing practice than endlessly repeating the letter ‘O, O, O, O’. Against Rousseau’s argument that this illustrates the natural antipathy of women to education, Anne Boyer suggests the girl had invented and exhausted a language unique to her own experience: ‘every O could have been, also, every letter and every word for the little girl: each O also an opening, a planet, a ring, a word, a query, a grammar’. These are the points at which sentences fail.
ArtReview℗Rediscovered: Kamala Markandaya’s ‘The Coffer Dams’℗Mark Rappolt℗Book Review℗26/10/2020℗The 1969 novel, set in newly-independent India, takes us to the roots of some of the key conflicts that have shaped our present℗By the time of her death in 2004, the works of Indian writer Kamala Markandaya (the pen name of Kamala Purnaiya Taylor), who had spent most of her life in Britain, had been largely forgotten. Her debut novel, Nectar in a Sieve (1954), a tale of rural love in modernising India, had been an award-winning bestseller, but as she turned her attention, in subsequent works, to issues of interracial relationships and eventually the immigrant experience in Britain, critics, audiences and publishers lost interest or tuned out. Markandaya became one of the many neglected English-language writers whose work tackled the experience of racism and contested identity in postwar India and Britain. Last year Small Axes republished Markandaya’s extraordinarily poignant and powerful novel The Nowhere Man (originally published in 1972), a tale of the growing alienation and racism experienced by an elderly Indian immigrant to Britain, which sparked a mini-renaissance of interest in Markandaya. Now it’s the turn of The Coffer Dams (originally published in 1969), a work that tackles issues – among them racism, colonialism, the British class system, indigenous rights, environmental issues and the homogenising forces of modernity – that (as is the case with The Nowhere Man) are as live today as they were when the work was originally published. Something that’s both a tribute to the author’s insight into the evolving world around her and a damning indictment of society’s wayward drift over the past 50 years. The plot revolves around the construction of a dam in the hills of Karnataka and the contrasting characters of its principal builder, the Englishman Clinton, who is dangerously attracted to the idea that he might be some modern-day (but more ethically rational) equivalent of early rapacious colonial-era conquerors such as Robert Clive or Richard Wellesley, and his young wife Helen, a woman navigating a ‘man’s town’ (and a man’s marriage), more interested in the lives and fates of displaced locals than bringing modernity to the hills and plains of the region. Between these two poles lies a community of British engineers and builders, imported Indian labourers and the indigenous people of the Malnad, whose elders and women are pushed to one side (their villages displaced) while their young men are lured into the construction of the cofferdams that will pave the way for the construction of the Great Dam itself. As building races at breakneck speed to beat the impending monsoons, the community is set up for a clash between academic (or modern) and local (or traditional) knowledge and belief systems, between races and cultures, between people who are seen and unseen, and received attitudes to all of these that have changed not nearly as much as the local landscape is about to. It’s to Markandaya’s great credit (and thanks to her unique sensibilities) that these conflicts are enacted as much between modern and traditional Indians as they are between the former colonisers and the formerly colonised (although in the little town that has grown up around the dam there is little that’s ‘former’ about either of these positions). Both, it seems, are struggling to come to terms with their relationship to the ambiguous realities of a newly independent India and the conflicts that led to its birth. At heart, The Coffer Dams is a novel about how we justify and then adapt to change, and the price we pay for it. While the novel suffers from the fact that the dam and its construction provides a somewhat disconnected stage set for this tragicomedy of clashing manners and customs, it nevertheless takes us to the roots of some of the key conflicts that have shaped our present. And ultimately, The Coffer Dams provides yet more evidence that Markandaya was not only one of the most acute analysts of the social conditions of her time but that, disturbingly, she continues to be that in ours.
ArtReview℗What Curators Could Learn from Iceland’s ‘Penis Museum’℗Oliver Basciano℗Book Review℗22/10/2020℗From an institution devoted to herring to a collection dedicated to a woman’s habit of picking up rocks on daily walks, Iceland’s eccentric museums are more than mere whimsy℗On the surface, American writer A. Kendra Greene’s The Museum of Whales You Will Never See: And Other Excursions to Iceland’s Most Unusual Museums (Penguin, 2020) – a tour of the niche museums of Iceland, be they the Museum of Icelandic Sorcery and Witchcraft or the Herring Era Museum – is mere whimsy. Certainly her prose occasionally verges on the twee. In one chapter, on the Skógar Folk Museum in the south of the country, for example, Greene begins every other paragraph in a faux-saga style: ‘They say it’s 1950 when the old society ends…’, ‘They say she knows the place like the back of her hand…’ Yet among the chapter-long studies of offbeat institutions such as the penis museum (‘Capra hircus, the goat specimens, are notably hairy. They look like animals unto themselves, like little opossums curled up and sleeping’), a museum of sea monster tales (‘one in three people in Arnarfjörður can tell a story and aren’t ashamed to do so’) or Petra’s Stone Collection, a house museum dedicated to one woman’s half-century habit of picking up a rock on her daily walk (‘we kneel here at this museum of her commitment’), Greene raises timely questions pertaining to the purpose of museums (last year the International Council of Museums sought to redefine such institutions as being concerned with wellbeing and social justice as opposed to preservation). ‘When does a collection become a museum?’ she asks. ‘Collectors collect. We need them to do that. But it’s something else that makes museums.’ Within each chapter Greene traces how these private obsessions came to be introduced to a wider public, and within that she rightly surmises that museums can only become museums when they express ‘collective determinations’. There is no state directive to these institutions, they are mostly family-run affairs (of a bird museum set up by a man called Sigurgeir, Greene writes ‘One suspects the next generation, Sigurgeir’s nieces and nephews, will take over when the time comes’) with little corporate spin or curatorial agenda. Organic in their composition, flexible to change, they possess instead ‘a kind of special sight for what is significant and meaningful and should be held on to’. For curators in bigger, grander institutions, those beyond Iceland, it seems there’s much to learn from these enthusiastic endeavours.
ArtReview℗An American in Paris Watches ‘Emily in Paris’℗Lauren Elkin℗Opinion℗21/10/2020℗The Netflix show tells us exactly what TV producers think of young women: all mermaid curls, no brains℗For what felt like ages I held out against watching Emily in Paris (2020). As an American in Paris I loathe the stereotype of the American in Paris, and only relented when BBC Scotland asked me to come on air and talk about the show. Ah, I thought. A chance to tell the world – or, well, Scotland – how much I loathe this stereotype. I’m only mildly embarrassed to admit I watched the whole show in two nights. I may even have giggled at a few of the jokes, and sighed at some views of Paris, even though Paris is right outside my door. ‘Paris of the mind is preferable to the real thing,’ as Moyra Davey once wrote. But once I’d left the bubble of pleasure the show created, I was left with a hangover of ambivalence. The writing is objectively terrible; it feels like it was written by a scattershot team consisting of The One With the Jokes, The Hack, and The One Who Went to Paris Once. The Hack is responsible for all the flat-footed dialogue (“you’re not stepping on my toes, you’re stepping into my shoes!”), coming up with lines like Carrie Bradshaw at her punniest (“I’m petit mort-ified!”). The Funny One is, occasionally, very funny (see the vagin jeune storyline). And The One Who Went to Paris Once must be responsible for the white-washing of the city, the xenophobia towards the French, the unflinching commitment to being as ringarde as possible, and no that does not mean basic. But what rankled about the show, I realized, isn’t all it gets wrong about France and the French – this is fantasy, not Italian neorealismo. It’s the show’s limited and, yes, misogynist conception of who Emily is, and who it allows her to be. There is an element of Everywomanness to her. She is hard-working, plucky, and resourceful when faced with challenges and trials, and doesn’t have any inconvenient special talents like, I don’t know, speaking French to get in the way of the target audience identifying with her. Like Christian in The Pilgrim’s Progress, she’s your average questing hero(ine). But where John Bunyan’s seventeenth-century religious allegory wonders if salvation exists, and if so, how can we attain it, in the world of Emily in Paris, redemption comes in the form of Instagram followers and bank. “Beyoncé’s worth far more than the Mona Lisa,” quips her best friend, approvingly. Paris is the City of Destruction and the Celestial City all at once. The degree to which Emily is ‘relatable’ constructs the audience as similarly young, white, and sheltered; if this ‘average’ viewer were suddenly moved by their employer to Paris, they might fare much like her – providing they were gorgeous and impossibly thin, with enough money to buy a closetful of Louboutins. This is the same problem that feminists have had with media and advertising as long as these things have existed: we’re being asked to consider that the skinny pretty girl is just like us, when she so blatantly isn’t; and then, in measuring the distance that divides us, we are left to measure our shortcomings, and to contemplate how we can make ourselves more like her. Cue the beauty industry, the diet industry, fast fashion. Yet like a good comic hero, Emily is also somehow worse than us: witness the many people online complaining that she is, in fact, not relatable; she is ‘arrogant,’ ‘annoying,’ ‘entitled.’ She is these things, it’s true, but all these people on the internet, schooling Emily in how not to be a terrible obnoxious unlikable person reminds me of what the literary scholar Patricia Meyer Spacks wrote about gossip: that it’s society’s way of regulating itself and determining what is acceptable. So is, apparently, amateur TV criticism. All this is insulting to Emily, and by extension to all the young women the show wants to sell stuff to – starting with a Netflix subscription, maybe a trip to Paris as soon as the pandemic’s over, and in the meantime whatever accessories they might feel they need as a result (see-through raincoats, lime green bucket bags, blue berets with red pom-poms, and tiaras, god help us), thinking they will make them feel like they’re in Paris. In their blatant careening towards the monaaaaaaay that such a show might be expected to generate, Emily in Paris’s producers have demonstrated that they don’t give a fine fuck about writing, characterisation, interior life. (Don’t get me wrong: this isn’t some Forsterian diatribe about round or flat characters. That’s the domain of amateur TV critics.) What they do seem to care about is building the perfect woman, and then tearing her down. As I watched the show, I kept thinking of Hilary Mantel’s 2013 lecture for the London Review of Books about Kate Middleton and the ‘royal body’. The Duchess of Cambridge, Mantel said, ‘appeared to have been designed by a committee and built by craftsmen, with a perfect plastic smile and the spindles of her limbs hand-turned and gloss-varnished.’ With her perfect abs and immobile mermaid waves, Emily, more so even than Middleton, who is, let’s not forget, a real person, actually has been designed by committee, not to continue the royal line but to sustain the franchise. On the radio they asked me if I identified with Emily at all and I said uhhhh for what felt like forever in radio time, before saying no, no, not at all. Because when I moved here I wasn’t anything like Emily; not only had I learned French at school, I had a few more notions of Normandy beyond Saving Private Ryan (1998). When I moved here, there were no smart phones, no Instagram, and the American in Paris narrative was about coming here and doing something creative – writing, painting, dancing, whatever – not making sales pitches like Don Draper in stilettos. But I can’t deny our commonalities. I have a lot of sympathy for the American girl abroad. I’ve been her, I’ve taught her, I occasionally hear from her, reaching out for help finding her feet. But on Emily in Paris, she’s another version of the jeune fille, the young girl, whom everyone feels authorised to hate. Think of every teenage girl on television, with few exceptions – they’re all whiny and intransigent and bothered, and we never really know why. The radical French philosophy collective Tiqqun published a polemic in 1999 called Preliminary Materials for a Theory of the Young Girl, which reads her as the ultimate consumer: when she thinks she’s expressing herself she’s only expressing commodity culture; she has no depth, no intimate reserves, she is all Spectacle. The young girl is not a gendered concept, but ‘the model citizen as redefined by consumer society since the First World War, in explicit response to the revolutionary menace.’ Although the terms in which Tiqqun make their argument are deeply sexist, their essential point holds: we are all young girls under the capitalist patriarchy. But the young girl herself, the actual gendered young female human animal, is always rife for exploitation, not least by Tiqqun.  In her recent book Females (2019), Andrea Long Chu echoes this argument (though in markedly un-misogynist terms), choosing to put it this way: ‘Everyone is female […] femaleness is a universal sex defined by self-negation, against which all politics, even feminist politics, rebels. Put more simply: Everyone is female, and everyone hates it.’ The jeune fille is all of us, but when she becomes the star of the show she’s none of us – just a skinny body on which to project our fucked-up ideas about beauty and female behaviour. Emily in Paris is a missed opportunity to say something real, for instance, about being a foreigner – an experience it would behove Americans to experience from time to time. (To wit: that early scene where Emily’s normcore boyfriend holds up his brand-new passport saying ‘Look what I got!’)  It is difficult to move to a foreign country, especially to a city as notoriously closed-off as Paris, and really, genuinely lonely, in a way the show doesn’t make room for. It is soul-crushing to find yourself rejected for the very compliance that, back home, you believed made you valued and loved. I’m angry that when the producers decided to tell the story of a young woman, they declined to give her a more textured existence. That they ask her to speak not French, but a dead, prefabricated English: fake it ’til you make it. At one point someone accuses her of being arrogant. ‘More ignorant than arrogant,’ she says, sadly. Why does she have to be ignorant? I groaned at my computer. Because that’s what the producers think of young women: all mermaid curls, no brains. But there was one shining moment of almost self-awareness, towards the end of episode 3. Hot hunky neighbour Gabriel asks Emily how she likes Paris. And the rest of the exchange goes like this: Emily: I like Paris. But I’m not sure Paris likes me. And maybe that’s ok. I’ve spent my entire life wanting to be liked. Gabriel: That’s a pretty miserable goal. Emily: Exactly. So, I’m going to give up trying.  Gabriel: Well, there’s just one problem. Emily: What’s that. Gabriel: I like you. He blinks his big eyes at her, walks away. She thinks about it. Does a cute little nose twitch, performing cuteness. She was on the verge of living for herself, being for herself. And just like that, he reels her back in.
ArtReview℗Artemisia Gentileschi Is More Than a Revenge Fantasy℗Megan Nolan℗Reviews℗20/10/2020℗The exhibition of the Italian Baroque artist at London’s National Gallery shows us a woman who confidently asserted her place in history℗Perhaps it had something to do with the seven-month absence from galleries on my part, but I can’t remember experiencing a more profoundly dramatic exhibition than Artemisia at London’s National Gallery, and few that were more moving. The painting we see on entering immediately communicates why this first major show of the Italian Baroque artist Artemisia Gentileschi in the UK is so necessary. Susanna and the Elders (1610) greets us boldly, mesmerising in itself, but even more so when you are aware of the fact that the artist was only seventeen when she painted it. Artemisia’s rendition of Susanna, bathing in her garden, being intruded upon by two men come to claim sexual favours is richly visceral – Susanna recoiling in revulsion, her desired solitude shattered, the men grossly conspiratorial in their invasion. Artemisia would return to the story of Susanna twice again in her later career (the exhibition shows us how she continued to reimagine the biblical scene, in 1622 and 1652), but it is the 1610  painting – in which Susanna is visibly distressed and potentially angry, rather than impassive or appealing to the heavens for intervention – that has become inextricably linked to the artist’s biography. At seventeen, Artemisia was a victim of a rape perpetrated by the artist Agostino Tassi. This incident, captured in court records which document how Artemisia voluntarily underwent torture in order to prove that her account was truthful, has come to be a dominant prism through which she is viewed by the wider world. This exhibition deals with that fact admirably, neither making an unnecessary meal of it nor ignoring it for the sake of some imagined propriety or mark of respect to the artist. Although the details of the rape are recounted, the show is framed around Artemisia’s triumph over the challenges of being a woman in her time. An outsize rendition of a quotation from her letters, ‘I’ll show your most illustrious lordship what a woman can do’, precedes her theatrical, breathtaking renditions of women as complex heroes. It is understandable that long-time devotees of Artemisia’s work may be frustrated by a one-note perception of her in contemporary media, where she is often experienced primarily as an angry woman whose career was a grand act of vengeance against her abuser. In recent years her painting Judith Beheading Holofernes (1612–13) has cropped up repeatedly to accompany writings about male violence against women – the figures serve as a sort of ancient relation to recent rape-revenge fantasies in films of wounded women turned mad with wrath. It isn’t hard to see why: it is an invigoratingly violent work. Judith’s mouth set firmly as she cuts the throat, giving the impression of hard-won satisfaction. Judith and her maidservant, united in their purpose, share a devilish conviviality which, when seen in this show, brings back to mind the two men united in their torment of Susanna. This is an overly – possibly even offensively – simplistic reading of Artemisia, but it isn’t necessary to instead completely ignore authorship and context. While it would be a travesty to reduce Artemisia to a victim of rape, it is not an insult to consider her particular life when it comes to how we read her work. The sense that one comes away with from here is not that of a woman who has triumphed over the trauma of rape, although she must have done that too, but of an artist who confidently asserted her place in history as she went along, despite the obstacles she faced. We see her life here not only through those most famous works that characterise the impression of her as out for vengeance against the male guard, but through letters, portraits done by other artists, and in lesser known works such as the startlingly erotic Mary Magdalene in Ecstasy (1623). As the exhibition’s curator Letizia Treves points out in a catalogue essay, Artemisia sent unsolicited self-portraits to renowned collectors, a gift for the future where her status would, she knew, be safe. The final painting, Self Portrait as the Allegory of Painting (1638–9), shows a woman in full possession of her extraordinary talents and with the knowledge of how celebrated she ought to be. Artemisia gives us a wonderful gift – the revelation of how sustained, rounded and remarkable she really was, and a thrillingly vivid sense of the life which bore it. The latter takes from the former not at all.
ArtReview℗Full of Plot Twists: Tavares Strachan, ‘In Plain Sight’ Review℗Oliver Basciano℗Reviews℗16/10/2020℗A riveting intervention in the debate on how the present treats problematic histories℗The Bahamian artist’s new exhibition has as many plot twists as a good outing to the multiplex, so explaining it without spoilers is tricky. In a room to the right of the gallery’s entrance a big book stands on a small table. It is titled the Encyclopedia of Invisibility, and copies of the book’s pages cover the walls, floor to ceiling. All the entries – the ones I’ve jotted down include Roland Moreno, the inventor of the smart card; the omer, an ancient Israelite unit of measure; Richey Edwards of Welsh band Manic Street Preachers – relate to a person or a thing that has in some way disappeared from view – either forgotten by history despite the ubiquity of their invention, or mysteriously vanished, as in the case of Edwards. In another gallery a figure constructed of neon depicts (the title informs us) the late Cuban ballet dancer Alicia Alonso. A series of mixed-media paintings collage together various figures that might be generalised as being Black heroes – footballer Viv Anderson, musician and activist Paul Robeson, Ethiopian leader Haile Selassie. A first-floor gallery continues the theme of recalling Black pioneers through 12 resin busts – including nurse Mary Seacole and singer Nina Simone – each face partially obscured by a series of found ceremonial African masks. Contemplation of the sculptures is interrupted, however, by a man wandering into the space, his clothes of the late nineteenth century, who starts to sing. He and a couple of further performers proceed to lead visitors on a musical tour full of ‘secret’ rooms hidden among the exhibits. Which is where I probably need to leave the description hanging. In the musical that follows we learn this figure is Matthew Henson, the Black American polar explorer, who recounts his adventures to a younger performer, playing his child. Within this, Henson’s heroism is hedged: we learn the past is complicated, detail is needed, that there is little in the way of heroes and villains but all figures will “be confronted by the judgment of history”; their actions, language and views found wanting. What’s important is to learn from the errors. “Only will can construct a new us,” ‘Henson’ sings. Strachan’s theatrical outing is a nuanced – and riveting – intervention in the otherwise shrill debate surrounding how the present treats histories it finds problematic.
ArtReview℗Giddy, Bright and Alive: Michael Clark’s Punk Ballet Seen Through the Eyes of Artists℗Isobel Harbison℗Reviews℗14/10/2020℗At London’s Barbican, ‘Michael Clark: Cosmic Dancer’ is loyal to the choreographer, and rich in its exploration of the creative scene pulsing around him℗Michael Clark: Cosmic Dancer at London’s Barbican continues its series of exhibitions devoted to contemporary dance, including Laurie Anderson, Trisha Brown, Gordon Matta-Clark (2011) and Trajal Harrell: Hoochie Koochie (2017). Celebrating home-grown talent with the first major exhibition of perhaps Britain’s most renowned contemporary choreographer, Cosmic Dancer is billed as a ‘constellation of portraits of Clark, through the eyes of the artists who have worked with him.’ And as risky as this approach sounds, with all its potential for platitudes and superficiality, what results is a diamond of an exhibition loyal to its subject, ambitious with its displays, and rich in its exploration of the connections between art, friendship and love. The Barbican is a tricky exhibition space to master, its centre cavernous and echoing, impaled by gargantuan squared pillars, flanked by minor chambers and overlooked by a segmented upper mezzanine. For Cosmic Dancer its potential to disorientate has been used effectively to convey the riotous punk energy that infused Clark’s beginnings. Blacked out and sectioned off, the space is set alight by Charles Atlas’s new video installation A Prune Twin (2020) cut from two of his previous ‘docu-fantasies’, documenting exaggerated versions of Clark’s early life. Hail the New Puritan (1985–6) located Clark in a cold, bright warehouse of London’s east-end where he choreographs and rehearses alongside others (playing, in Atlas’s words, ‘outsize versions of themselves’), twirls along canals, travels on tubes, styles himself in performance artist Leigh Bowery’s dark apartment, dances in clubs, all set against a backdrop of scrap heaps, gas works, dole queues and the tightening clutch of Thatcher’s England. Atlas cut this work with sequences from Because We Must (1989), based on Clark’s eponymous ballet staged at Sadler’s Wells showing his troupe costumed like dinosaurs, their balletic phrasings punctuated with raucous interludes by Bowery and Leslie Bryant. Among them, Clark danced the ‘chosen maiden’ from Igor Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring (1913). Costumes were bold, graphic, ungendered and often sequinned and Atlas used chroma-key technology to set their fabrics as dancers’ backgrounds, spinning and pivoting them to create dizzying visual effects. Re-edited and shown across nine hanging screens and four monitors, sequences run out of sync and chronology, set to the booming elegies of Clark’s youth, like the Velvet Underground’s ‘Venus In Furs’ (1967). As these images and sounds flood the space the effect is of navigating Clark’s memory of London during the early 1980s, giddy and bright and alive. Atlas’s installation sets a tone but also provides a historical waypoint. He met Clark in 1982 when they were working with Karole Armitage in New York. Clark had progressed swiftly from the Royal Ballet School and Ballet Rambert to poke around postmodern dance as a bright twenty-year-old choreographer and Atlas was taken with the gait and flair of London’s young Warhol and the creative promiscuity pulsing around him, artists, designers and musicians bedding down in squats and riding high in clubs. Atlas was pivotal, positioning the emerging Clark before his lens for a Channel 4 commission, an opportunity that catapulted Clark far beyond the parameters of contemporary dance or London’s gritty art scene, and into television’s primetime. It also inaugurated a body of film and video that makes such a retrospective ‘portrait’ of a choreographer possible today, even without the scheduling of live dance. Atlas’s efforts are complimented by a ‘Film Archive’ across two rooms, evidencing the role of television in Clark’s ascent, with the BBC, ITV and Channel 4 regularly broadcasting his pieces to mass audiences. Wrong (1989, ITV, South Bank Show), for example, was a dance performed nude by Clark and Stephen Petronio before a highly pixelated image of their naked embrace, accompanied by Josie Jones’s voice listing Tory wrongdoings. This piece was aired as the AIDS crises raged on but while the political and sensual realities of homosexuality remained largely unattended on British television, and there’s a strong sense throughout the exhibition of how Clark posed questions about gender, sexuality and equality through dance in nuanced and ever-evolving ways. Around Atlas’s fulcrum comes a series of installations styled in different tones appropriate to Clark’s heterogenous collaborations. In an adjacent room is a projection of two music videos directed by artist Cerith Wyn Evans for The Fall, shot with multiple cameras on the set of Clark’s I Am Curious Orange (1988, Amsterdam, Holland Festival). Crowding this room are recreations of props designed by Clark for this irreverent, mutually charged performance, including outlandish body-size Heinz Beans cans with an outsize burger and chips. Nearby is a more sombre installation in a heavily draped dark room fitted with imposing Marshall speakers where current/SEE (1998) is projected, the image of Susan Stenger and her band Big Bottom (Angela Bulloch, Wyn Evans, Tom Gidley, and J. Mitch Flacko) encircling Clark on a dark stage as he dances. As we drown in the heavy bass of her sustained chord sequence, we watch Clark’s limbs bend and fold, his trunk rotating in slow, steady evolutions. A life, danced in abstraction. Upstairs Sarah Lucas’s installation includes Cnut (2004), Clark’s body cast in raw concrete from the bust down. He’s sitting on the toilet smoking a cigarette. This sculpture is mounted upon another made of jesmonite, a giant pink ham Sandwich (2004). When Lucas made them, Clark had stepped away from choreography and was living with her, sometimes assisting in her studio, and I imagine the lone dancer sitting contemplating the body’s spoils. A neighbouring room is painted black. Along one side hangs bawdy costumes by Bowery and Body Map celebrating body diversity through careful cutting, contouring, and layering. Opposite them run a series of small-scale portraits of Clark by Elizabeth Peyton (made between 2006 and 2009), each capturing the quiet intensity of this watery-eyed boy, the far-away thoughts of a star in repose. As the noises and chords of Clark’s life spill between the objects and art made by his friends, this seems less an exhibition about one individual, or even a particular art scene, than an exposition of a life presented through its works and those that both roused and surrounded it.    
ArtReview℗The Classroom of Postcapitalist Desire: Mark Fisher’s Final Lectures℗Adam Harper℗Book Review℗13/10/2020℗A new collection of the late theorist’s lectures offers a toolbox for breaking through the veil of ‘capitalist realism’℗Any response to the political and material tumult with which the citizens of planet Earth have catapulted themselves into the 2020s would have to begin and end with this: there is a desire for something other than *gestures broadly at everything* this. But how is it that we can transition to a better system, when capitalism can claim to have given us so much of what we want? Sure, capitalism might be a bit depressing, but it’s the only game in town, and it gave you that iPhone and that Starbucks coffee, didn’t it? Both of which you’ll be needing today if you’re going to help your employer generate the necessary profit, incidentally. Mark Fisher’s Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? (2009) named and gave a timely account of this ideology, and why it tells us that we can’t hope for anything better than unfettered late capitalism. Capitalist Realism gave a new generation of leftists a landmark text that conceptualised the hitherto vague, dispiriting malaise of the twenty-first century. Before his death in January 2017, Fisher was working on ways to break through the veil of capitalist realism, or at least learn from earlier moments in history, prior to the successes of the right in the 1970s and 1980s, such as post-punk, weird science fiction on the BBC, and the uncanny literature of the early twentieth century. His unfinished project Acid Communism was to be a reappraisal of the counterculture and psychedelia of the 1960s and 1970s. Postcapitalist Desire: The Final Lectures (2020), edited by Fisher’s former student Matt Colquhoun, offers another glimpse into where his thinking was headed, and in turn, a toolbox for thinking beyond capitalist realism. The ‘final lectures’ of the title are taken from ‘Postcapitalist Desire’, a course that Fisher taught for the Master’s degree in Contemporary Art Theory at Goldsmiths, University of London, taking places on Monday mornings in the autumn of 2016. Fisher wanted to pose challenging questions about the possibilities of moving beyond capitalism such as: ‘is there really a desire for something beyond capitalism?’ To what extent ‘is our desire for postcapitalism always-already captured and neutralised by capitalism itself’? And, rejecting the idea that a critique of capitalism necessitates a complete rejection of modern life and everything in it, ‘is it possible to retain some of the libidinal, technological infrastructure of capital and move beyond capital?’ Fisher senses that it might be, and so for him, postcapitalism is ‘a victory that will come through capitalism… something that developed out of capitalism. It develops from capitalism and moves beyond capitalism.’ As both Fisher and Colquhoun observe, this hotly debated position has come to be known as accelerationism, and for Colquhoun, Fisher was ‘attempting to describe to his students, from the ground up, a new praxis for a left-accelerationism.’ The question of what can be salvaged from the enemy in the fight against it has been one of the most urgent and controversial in left-wing thought for well over a century. Transcribed from recordings and incorporating dialogue with students in the room, Postcapitalist Desire reveals a different Fisher than that of his writings – as Colquhoun puts it, ‘an experimental Fisher […] Fisher uncut; Fisher in his element’; the lectures ‘would be Mark’s sounding board for Acid Communism’. While Colquhoun tentatively frames the final lectures as the embryo or fragment of a lost Acid Communism opus, comparing it with philosopher Gilles Deleuze’s unfinished book on Marx, it is Fisher’s role as a teacher that is perhaps most unique and valuable about Postcapitalist Desire. With each lecture based on students having read one or two chapter-length texts by earlier theorists, philosophers, scholars and journalists, the sessions are less easily read as a series of notes towards an original contribution to critical theory than a seminar on a collection of some of the most pressing and provocative texts in the left theoretical tradition, many of which have been unjustly neglected. The readings for the whole module are given in the Appendix, and they make a fascinating list, one notable, among other things, for its extensive inclusion of texts by women both well-known (Naomi Klein, Shulamith Firestone, Jodi Dean) and deserving of more attention (J.K. Gibson-Graham, Silvia Federici, Eden Medina). Postcapitalist Desire is thus very much the course it was originally intended to be: a primer on the topic, with Fisher’s curation and guidance as strident and insightful as ever, but by no means sidelining the exploratory, improvisatory and indeed democratic dimension of the teaching process – as Fisher puts it towards the end of the first lecture, ‘far too much of me talking today’. It was not just his writing that was celebrated after Fisher’s death but his teaching, too, by the lucky few who got to experience it. And with this book, the growing number of readers Fisher has accrued since his death, many of them beyond academia and the theoretical left, have an incisive yet personable (and frequently humourous) introduction to writers as canonical and formidable as Herbert Marcuse, György Lukács, and Jean-François Lyotard as well as lesser known names such as Ellen Willis, Nancy Hartsock and Jefferson Cowie, and key but complex concepts such as the death drive, ressentiment, standpoint epistemology, reification, and even capital and capitalism themselves. In one of the book’s most densely informative lectures, ‘From Class Consciousness to Group Consciousness,’ Fisher discusses the political strategy of consciousness-raising, its history, and how it gives groups of the oppressed a clearer view of their common struggles. As he talks so relatably through the frustration and absurdity of life under contemporary capitalism with his students, this is precisely what Fisher was doing in the classroom of postcapitalist desire.
ArtReview℗The Most Ambitious Crossover Event in History? Try Art Parkour℗Eddy Frankel℗Reviews℗12/10/2020℗If you can get over the whole Duchamp-does-street-art vibe, artist Klara Liden’s London exhibition is a neat celebration of the grime, garbage and putrefaction of our cities℗The last thing 2020 needed was for art parkour to become a thing, but here we are, with a video by Klara Liden that finds the Berlin-based artist climbing, shimmying and contorting over some scaffolding, the camera endlessly rotating around her, like a builder who’s dropped a hammer right after they’ve dropped acid. It’s a repetitive, strained bunch of movements Liden puts herself through, an interminable scaling of the carapace of some unnamed city. And the urban environment, its hidden grimy bits especially, are the sooty stars of this show. You’re greeted downstairs by three enormous glowing, floating oil tanks: big, plastic, flesh-coloured containers with a hole right through the middle, like the bellybuttons of concrete giants. Upstairs you find a row of dirt-encrusted, graffitied junction boxes, plastic housing for a city’s wires and fuses. This is urbanity’s electric pulse, its high voltage heartbeat. Each is covered with the symbols of the street it once lived on: football stickers, the rushed tags of local gangs, the mould of damp weather, the accumulated grey smudge of pollution. The pollution and mould are the best things about the works: all those years of cars chugging by, of buses and taxis and cigarette smoke, inscribed darkly on the once pristine plastic of the boxes. It’s urban history in filth. These found objects – the junction boxes and oil tanks – are neat works of art if you can get over the whole Duchamp-does-street-art vibe. They’re the minimalist boxes that once helped keep our cityscapes ticking along, now ripped out of their context and left as purely decorative objects, dragging the street into the gallery. They represent how we’re kept warm over winter, how our lights stay on, how our phones keep ringing. They’re the grotty hidden truth behind the glossy shell of our urban lives. The video, though, is only memorable for its vague silliness, its stern-faced dedication to a faintly ridiculous task. It’s not quite humorous enough to be funny, not deadpan enough to work as a successful piece of performance art. It doesn’t deliver on its promises as well as the sculptures do. At its worst, Liden’s exhibition is dirty street art and conceptual parkour, but at its best, it’s a little celebration of the grime, garbage and putrefaction of our cities. It’s a plea to find beauty wherever you can, even if things are pretty ugly out there.
ArtReview℗‘SLOW DANS’ Review: Elizabeth Price’s Haunting Video Trilogy℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Reviews℗08/10/2020℗The British artist’s vision of our postindustrial and technocratic world takes on a sharper edge℗That this is an age of shuttered nightclubs and banned gatherings adds a bleak note to viewing SLOW DANS. Elizabeth Price’s videoworks of the last decade have often borrowed from pop music its sounds, tempo and visual glamour, as much as celebrating pop’s investment in the ecstasy of coming together in feeling rather than thinking. But Price’s works have balanced their critical fascination with the thrall of commodity culture with an increasingly research-driven attention to the social world of labour and industry, and the different register of solidarity and sociality embedded in labour and making. Seeing SLOW DANS – an iteration of Price’s most recent trilogy of videos, co-commissioned by Artangel – glowing gaudily in the cavernous space of a nineteenth-century public assembly room in South London conjures ghosts: who assembled here, once? Suffragettes? Union men? Ballroom-dancing enthusiasts? Disco divas? Political groupings? If that sense of collectivity recedes even further in the shadow of a pandemic, its vanishing distance was already inscribed in the videos on show here before COVID-19 made its appearance. Each large, multiscreen projection contains a story narrated by various iterations of Price’s now-familiar disembodied voice-synthesisers and flickering animated captions. Quizzical, slightly catatonic in their halting reveries, they unspool fables of contemporary human life as if reconstituting these from the archaeological fragments and unreliable archives left to a perhaps distant future. In KOHL (2018), across four vertical screens occupied by the negative and inverted image of a coalmine’s pit-head tower and winch, a cursor blinks and an account is typed out ‘live’ of unexplained ‘visitants’ appearing in the underground spaces of carparks, data centres and gyms, where once they appeared in the flooded underground networks of disused mines. Ghosts of deindustrialisation (the scripts mention the closure of English collieries) troubling the anodyne venues of service-sector capitalism? Then a waving tangle of CGI ferns take over the screens. Maybe a reference to how tree ferns are the organic origin of many British coalfields; they’re also cyphers of everything lost, subterranean or repressed. Weirdly, though, their fronds appear to carry the designs of men’s neckties – a segue to FELT TIP (2018), projected opposite. Where KOHL feels like a preamble, quietly setting the stage of this out-of-joint temporality, FELT TIP sucks us into a vortex of improbable associative leaps, linking the phallic associations of twentieth-century men’s business ties to the first digital weaving looms in a kind of hallucinatory PowerPoint presentation that charts the evolution of the necktie’s heraldic motifs and diagonal bands into what might appear as conduits, circuitry and microchips. This delirious but convincing exposition is spoken by an obscure cadre who operate in the “administrative core”; near-future middle-management, perhaps, who store data in the DNA of their fingernails, and who seem jokily obsessed with corporate aesthetics and the links between ties, textile, tactility, index fingers and tongues, having taken to wearing ties as a kind of ironic gesture of their “own long memory”. What these pedants remember, or why they remember it, is hard to decrypt from their odd collective monologue, but “things haven’t gone our way”. Underlying FELT TIP’s mannered humour is an intuition of the disintegrating relationship between material labour (the mine-head appears as the ‘below’ to the office desk’s ‘above’), managerialism and gender – a pair of bare legs in high heels appear, dance-stepping, and it takes a moment to notice their hairiness. If binaries have blurred, and patriarchy can’t get it up anymore, FELT TIP seems to suggest this has some hard-to-fathom relationship to the rise of information over production. If FELT TIP and KOHL frame the joylessly postindustrial and technocratic world as deeply disturbed (haunted, even) by the spectre of materiality and tactility, then administration, management, information – these hegemonic aspects of twenty-first-century capitalist life – find themselves the target of THE TEACHERS (2019), which is projected between them. Here Price’s stuttering digital orators tell of a legendary group of academics who became voluntarily mute, withdrawing from their language-driven professions, and replacing their speech with nonlinguistic utterances. As the images of high-fashion dresses that resemble ceremonial robes warp and fade across the screens, the narrators offer the idea that the sibilant phonemes the ‘teachers’ utter are really renderings of the everyday noises of their abandoned day-jobs – mouse clicks, keyboard clatter, the shuffling of documents. A protest, then, against the bureaucratisation of knowledge, as the stand-in for a sensual (female) human bodily presence unfurls before us. If Price’s playful, perverse mimicry of a moribund culture has an even sharper edge right now, it’s because it dramatises the often unacknowledged battle for power in our culture, which we experience every day – the attempted subordination of material, bodily, sensual contingency to administration, and of living sociability to lifeless systems.
ArtReview℗‘Heritage and Debt’ Review – Contemporary Art and the Geopolitics of Globalization℗Jonathan T.D. Neil℗Book Review℗08/10/2020℗In ‘Heritage and Debt’, David Joselit offers a convincing description of the global and historical dynamics that produced ‘contemporary art’ as something distinct from what preceded it℗What David Joselit offers in Heritage and Debt (2020) is a convincing description of the global and historical dynamics that produced ‘contemporary art’ as something distinct from what preceded it. For most observers of art and its history today, that question would be answered with some combination of ‘postmodernism’ and ‘modernism’, which is not incorrect. But on Joselit’s account, that answer is both woefully incomplete and politically compromised. Prior to 1989, the global economic order was divided into a hierarchy (as the West saw it) of three different worlds: the advanced capitalist economies of the first, the socialist economies of the second and the developing economies of the third. Joselit’s first innovation is to identify each of these worlds with its own aesthetic ‘idiom’: a ‘modern/postmodern’ idiom for the first world, a ‘realist/mass cultural’ idiom for the second world and a ‘popular/indigenous’ idiom for the third. The first world valued its own idiom above the others, whose products it collected, or dismissed, as artefacts, decoration or kitsch. As a second innovation, Joselit proposes a ‘deregulation of images’ paralleling the economic deregulation that began in the West during the late 1970s, accelerated during the 1980s and went global after 1991 with the Soviet Union’s collapse and China’s rise. Joselit’s deregulation entailed postcolonial practices of indigenous artists, socialist realism from China and the USSR, and underground art from Soviet bloc countries and South America claiming equal status with first-world fine art, in both exhibitions and sales. What Joselit calls the ensuing ‘recalibration’ of aesthetic value and recognition is conducted through the marshalling of ‘heritage’: inherited cultural resources and properties that are available not just to those within a specific culture but to everyone. Importantly, Joselit describes ‘heritage’ as a ‘set of living traditions’ whose ‘invocations’ do not ‘inherently possess a specific political valence, either conservative or progressive’, but whose ‘potential lies in the negotiation… between heritage and perceived debts to “one’s own” cultures and those of others’. When cultural heritage is ‘synchronized’ in and with the present through strategies of ‘appropriation’, ‘pastiche’, ‘reframing’ and ‘curation’ – all definitive strategies of global contemporary artistic practice – it leads either to art’s ‘financialization’ (bad) or to new forms of ‘authorization’ (good). Either way, the dynamic of idiomatic deregulation and the synchronization of cultural heritage in the present is what produces the phenomenon, and our period, of ‘global contemporary art’. This is surely right. As history it integrates and coordinates the geopolitics of ‘globalization’ with diverse practices: Joselit includes close readings of Jeff Koons, Ai Weiwei, Shahzia Sikander and Raqs Media Collective, among others. As theory it does for the ‘cultural logic’ of contemporary art what Fredric Jameson did for postmodernism. But as an ethics and politics of art practice and history it is less convincing. Putting aside Joselit’s hyperbolic demonisation of the market and art’s financialisation, his prescription for ‘art’s progressive politics’ ultimately turns on one favoured concept, ‘authorization’, which is too capacious to do the job meant for it: progressively minded subjects must ‘authorize’ themselves; every artwork must itself be ‘authorized’; the ‘meaning’ of images is determined by the ‘social and geopolitical conditions’ under which they are ‘authorized’ to appear; aesthetic strategies are ‘differently authorized in different parts of the world’, and so forth. When Joselit does explicitly state what he means by ‘authorization’, he calls it ‘a provisional situational seizure of a quantum of meaning as legitimately one’s own’ (my emphasis). One could be forgiven for thinking Joselit was talking here about Twitter or Instagram rather than laying out the programme for a ‘responsible history of global contemporary art’. The question of course is, ‘Who decides what’s legitimate, and how?’ But this goes unaddressed in Joselit’s account. ‘Legitimacy’ is a problem not just for art history and criticism. It is the crisis faced by the global north today, politically (with neoliberal democracy threatened from both right and left), socially (with the reckoning of racism and colonisation) and economically (with the rise of authoritarian capitalism). But perhaps these are questions for Joselit’s next book.
ArtReview℗‘Lucifer Over London’ Review: Messages to an Adopted Home℗Oliver Basciano℗Book Review℗02/10/2020℗In this newly translated anthology, nine writers reflect on their city of adoption℗The immigrant experience in London provides the framework for this anthology, which contains a photographic portfolio and eight essays by writers born outside of Britain (mainly in Europe) but now resident in the capital. Yet what transpires is more a meditation on the culture of the English than on the condition of being from elsewhere.  Zhejiang-born British-Chinese novelist Xiaolu Guo takes the reader through her first arrival in the UK in 2002 to undertaking a citizenship test a few years later. One day she was sitting in a café, puzzling over the drama playing on the radio in the background. When asked, the owner of the cafe informed her it was The Archers (1950–), a long-running soap centring on the inhabitants of a rural village. ‘Their conversations seemed to be too indirect, touching on topics like climate change or organic farming, but never ever truly entering [them],’ Guo writes. It was through listening to the series – rather than all the facts and figures the citizenship test required her to learn – that she came to understand her adopted country. ‘People often don’t think the English have ideology,’ yet, she realises, ‘the most powerful kinds of ideology work by concealment.’ ‘People say it takes three generations of immigrants to become native, or feel native,’ Guo continues. ‘In this case, I had to hope that my grandchildren would feel less alien here, assuming they would be willing to stay in this country when they grew up.’ While my grandparents were Italian enough to be referred to as nonna and nonno, and my dad grew up in a North London house whose multiple rooms were home to a shifting cast of uncles, great-aunts and second cousins coming and going between the two countries, working in the West End restaurant trade, slipping between languages, my own trips to Italy are those of an English tourist, confused by the tongue, an alien in culture and law. So as a reader, I feel, usefully, under the microscope. If any common theme comes out of the observations contained within this collection it’s that in London, perhaps more than any other part of Britain, a lot remains unsaid and unseen. It is a sense of reservation that chimes personally. In a list of things that Portuguese writer Susana Moreira Marques strives for, presumably with the aim of assimilation, she includes, ‘to learn invisibility’. The Russian-born writer Zinovy Zinik observes, ‘There are cities, such as Paris or New York, that look like their postcards, whose visage corresponds in reality to the image of them you had in advance constructed in your mind. London is not like anything you’d imagined it to be.’ There are moments when this collection, which has been published without introduction or other contextualisation, comes across as a slightly more literary version of Bill Bryson’s twee American-in-Britain travelogue Notes from a Small Island (1995). Bar Guo’s standout text, there is little that touches on the country’s resurgent nationalism, mainstream antimigrant rhetoric or even Brexit. While their nationalities are disparate, the writers mostly come from a certain privilege and stable economies, arriving in the UK by choice: to study or work, often in journalism or academia. These are mostly personal stories, and lack the bite of, say, Zadie Smith’s White Teeth (2000) (or going much further back, Samuel Johnson’s descriptions of crime, corruption and squalor in his 1738 poem ‘London’), yet when Mexican writer Chloe Aridjis fondly describes passing London’s Animals in War Memorial as ‘a rupture in my journey, pulling me out of whatever mood’, or when Zinik recalls the secret drinking dens of Soho, there emerges an affectionate portrait of an adopted home that slowly, begrudgingly, gives back, or at least gives way, to those who live here. ‘By increments, each time revealing a bit more,’ as Moreira Marques puts it, until London belongs to you. Or at least to your grandkids.
ArtReview℗The Ethics of ‘Eating Chilli Crab in the Anthropocene’℗Adeline Chia℗Book Review℗30/09/2020℗Time to put down those seafood mallets? A new anthology of Singaporean writers examines everyday environmentalism℗The title essay in this youth-powered anthology of environmental thinkpieces asks: how acceptable is it to eat chilli crab (a local delicacy comprising mud crab stirfried in tomato and chilli sauce) during a geological epoch marked by human activity on earth? The essay, written by Neo Xiaoyun, takes you on a meandering journey through historical crab-human relations, Singapore’s culinary tourism marketing, crab biology and farming, and a brief David Foster Wallace-inspired detour into a discussion on whether crustaceans feel pain. Short answer: put down those seafood mallets. The focus on the ethics of mundane choices is characteristic of this book, featuring 12 essays by Singaporeans or Singapore-based writers born between 1993 and 1998. By using a menagerie of familiar animals from Singapore’s wildlife (such as otters, monkeys and mynahs) as focal points for larger conversations, they aim to persuade more people to join the climate activism movement by showing that environmental concerns are part of the fabric of everyday life. Call it Asian tact or Singaporean pragmatism or whatever, their tone is gently cajoling rather than shaming, à la Swedish teen activist Greta How-dare-you Thunberg. The editor, Matthew Schneider-Mayerson, says the book was written and edited in ‘a spirit of constructive and affectionate criticism’. Respectfully, methodically, they hope to convince people and the government to mitigate, if not reverse, the catastrophic end towards which the planet is heading. Schneider-Mayerson is assistant professor in environmental studies at Singapore’s Yale-NUS College; consequently most of the authors gathered here can be situated among his course’s alumni. The tome demonstrates the liveliness of thought in the fast-growing field of environmental humanities in Singapore, which links traditional humanities subjects, such as literature, philosophy and cultural studies, with environmental studies. The interdisciplinary flavour is borne out in titles such as ‘An Oily Mirror: 1950s Orang Minyak Films as Singaporean Petrohorror’ (in local urban legend, the orang minyak is an oil-covered sexual predator who eludes capture because of his literal slipperiness). Elsewhere, a look at the invasive species of Javan mynahs leads into an examination of the desirable human citizen in Singapore, while a discussion of the manmade landfill island Pulau Semakau becomes a way of talking about the erasure of indigenous histories – the island was the last stronghold of the seafaring orang laut. Besides the intellectual exercises of deconstructing the complicated web of relations between nature and culture in Singapore, the book also provides alternative models. The last few essays suggest ways in which to build a better world for humans and nonhumans, such as by inculcating new values like collaboration and frugality in the young to prepare them for living in a climate-changed world (optimistic projection) or general civilisational collapse (less optimistic). The final essay maps out a systematic degrowth plan for a post-carbon Singapore that every politician should read. This is a well-shaped book in terms of its content, which is testament to a good editor – my only quibble is that it might be too edited. The essays (by 12 different authors) are described as chapters (implying a consistent argument), and nobody disagrees with one another. The texts also have a similar format, often starting with a personal anecdote before segueing into a broader discussion, which, in itself, isn’t a problem, but begins to become repetitive when replicated 12 times. Moreover, the earnest first-person tone, with its penchant for breezy aphorisms (‘as go the crabs, so go you and me’), makes the book feel like the work of one author instead of many. Dumb as the conspiracy theory alleging that the global youth climate movement is manipulated by some sinister puppet master is, perhaps it would be more prudent to keep the voices a little uneven, a little more untamed. Multispecies flourishing, right?
ArtReview℗McKenzie Wark, ‘Sensoria’ Review: What Is the Point of Scholarship?℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Book Review℗25/09/2020℗In her latest book, Wark reflects on 19 writers rethinking the effect and evolution of technocapitalism on human consciousness  ℗McKenzie Wark opens her introduction to Sensoria by asking, ‘What is the point of scholarship?’ Wark’s answer is that scholarship ‘is about the common task of knowing the world’. This seems a sound definition as well as a worthwhile project for humanity in the twenty-first century, and Sensoria collects essays in which Wark summarises and reflects on the writings of 19 contemporary authors who are obsessed with the development and overarching influence of technology, of the future of global capitalism, how the two intertwine, and their effect on human life and human consciousness. Sensoria is a wide view of the hybrid intellectual culture that has formed somewhere across cultural studies, philosophy, art and the internet in the last two decades, with the texts grouped in three sections titled ‘aesthetics’, ‘ethnographics’ and ‘technics’. Wark’s essays on aesthetics range from her discussion of the fading (Western) ideal of beauty in Sianne Ngai’s aesthetic categories of contemporary online attention – the ‘zany, cute and interesting’ – to Kodwo Eshun’s writing about Afrofuturism, Detroit Techno and Black culture (in More Brilliant than the Sun, 1998), in which Wark finds a seminal example of an aesthetic that dissolves the limits of bourgeois (and white) humanism. In ‘ethnographics’, Wark takes a global tour of how politics and governance are being mutated by the power of information systems. Here she sets discussions of race and algorithmic policing in America (in Jackie Wang’s Carceral Capitalism, 2018) alongside the history and future of China’s Communist party-run capitalism (in Wang Hui’s China’s Twentieth Century, 2016), before turning to postcolonial writers who take issue with the intersection of the West’s philosophical tradition of Enlightenment and its imperial imagination – such as Achille Mbembe’s On the Postcolony (2001). Meanwhile, in ‘technics’, Wark zooms in on writers who theorise the new cultures shaped by technology and capital, such as Cory Doctorow on private property and digital creativity, Lev Manovich on software, and Benjamin Bratton’s planetary-scale vision of information and governance driven by computational networks, not nation states (in Bratton’s The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty, 2016). Running through many of the texts (or Wark’s attention to them) are two recurring preoccupations: the first is that we might be witnessing the end of capitalism, and the supersession of the commodity, or at least its total dematerialisation into information. It has to be said, though, that for all its Marxian-sounding talk of capital and commodities, Sensoria doesn’t really go for actual economic analysis, preferring the breathless, apocalyptic hyperbole of Accelerationism (to which, her misgivings and counterarguments notwithstanding, Wark seems enduringly indebted). This links to the second main line: that the status of human being and subjectivity found in both Enlightenment thinking and the politics of liberalism are dissolved by this tech-determined mutation of capitalism. ‘The tech itself authors ways of being’, as Wark aptly summarises Eshun’s position, or, quoting Bratton, rather than being in charge of the system, we are merely ‘human hood ornaments’. In this, Sensoria is very much in thrall to an outlook in much contemporary thinking that is indifferent to human beings, or what we might want, since we’re only really the product of processes – economic, technological and environmental – that we never determined from the start. As a counter to the Accelerationist and Speculative Realist thinking she can’t quite shake off, Wark’s alternative is to look for a more holistic, pre-modern erasure of the distinction between humans and nature, in which the old Western philosophical subject-object opposition disappears; ‘a structure for thought that… does away with attempts to find what is special in a human development out of the animal’. Marx once wrote that ‘the philosophers have only interpreted the world… the point is to change it.’ For Wark and her associates it’s humans who are going to be changed, since they’ve done enough of changing the world. The irony is that if that’s the case, scholarship, or the task of knowing the world, seems largely futile.
ArtReview℗Artist Renato Leotta Puts Turin’s History Under the Spotlight℗Francesco Tenaglia℗Reviews℗22/09/2020℗By illuminating the architecture and collections of Castello di Rivoli, the Turin-born artist offers an elegant retelling of the region’s cultural and historical identity℗In Renato Leotta’s Sole, two dynasties intertwine. One, the aristocratic House of Savoy, rulers of the Kingdom of Italy (1861–1946), who almost a millennium ago came into possession of the building that now houses Turin’s museum of contemporary art. The other, the Agnelli family, which, through FIAT, radically shaped twentieth-century Italy. Leotta operates here with diplomatic finesse and great economy: his exhibition consists of headlights from various models by the car manufacturer, artificially dimmed into spotlights for a scenography and trained on works from the museum’s collection or architectural details bearing a ‘Piedmontese’ identity. Gleams skim an anthropomorphic black sculpture (Persone nere, 1984) and a stool (Untitled, 1979) by, respectively, the Piedmontese Michelangelo Pistoletto and Marisa Merz; a fake moon hides itself in a medieval well; a timid Ducato truck vivifies a Savoy monogram on the fireplace; the eye of an Uno Rally shines on the local mud Richard Long used for a site-specific work (Rivoli Mud Circle, 1996). One of the most ingenious inventions is the spot on a photograph (1/25, 1965) by the Genovese Giulio Paolini, highlighting an unassuming ‘Piedmont’ in an advertising banner for Galup, a popular confectionery company, recently bankrupt. Inviting an alternative route through the museum’s works in this fashion, emphasising potentially overlooked ‘nodes’, Leotta underscores the expatriation of FIAT to the US and the encroachment of heavy industry into the cultural economy, alluding through the use of waste material to another local specialty, Arte Povera. At the same time, he perhaps also hints that sustaining Turin’s self-image, the preservation of a consolidated cultural splendour, has been supported by a less ‘noble’, evaporated industry. Leotta, here, has managed to work on the passage of time. The intensity of each light is designed for each specific room and takes into account changes occurring in natural light. The artist, having relocated to Sicily, has followed a reverse path to the one that brought southern citizens, including his own parents, to settle in the richer north. We may consider Sole the synthesis of a moment of passage – his own movement combined with Piedmont’s historical arc – delivered without didacticism and imbued with almost effortless elegance and clarity.
ArtReview℗11th Berlin Biennale Review – Exhausting but Rewarding℗Mark Rappolt℗Reviews℗18/09/2020℗Drawing its title from the work of poet Iman Mersal, The Crack Begins Within gathers artists who largely identify with the Global South℗Zehra Doğan’s graphic novel Xêzên Dizî (The Hidden Drawings, 2018–20) was written, in Kurmancî Kurdish, while the artist, activist and award-winning journalist was a political prisoner in Turkey’s Amed prison. She ended up there having been sentenced, in 2017, to two years, nine months and 22 days for ‘terrorist propaganda’ after having shared a painting depicting the destruction of Nusaybin in southeast Turkey on social media. Her story is a reminder of the real risks involved in telling some truths and a signal of the conjunction of activism and journalism (or research), that underpins and perhaps even defines much of the art on show in this latest edition of the Berlin Biennale. Drawing its title from the work of Egyptian (now Canada-based) poet Iman Mersal (and in particular her work revolving around the theme of motherhood), The Crack Begins Within gathers participants who largely identify with the Global South and is styled as an ‘epilogue’ to the year-long process of workshops, projects and exhibitions curated by an intergenerational group of curators comprising María Berrios, Renata Cervetto, Lisette Lagnado and Agustín Pérez Rubio who are from or connected to South America. But while this styling might emphasise a process that came before (and that many visitors might not have witnessed other than via the archives collected at ExRotaprint, a former printworks in one of the poorest and most migrant-heavy districts of the city, that now functions as one of the biennial’s four venues), the exhibition functions as a discrete entity in its own right.  In a sense, shaping the biennial as a progress rather than an event emphasises that many of the themes around which the exhibition revolves – the ongoing postcolonial struggle, religious and political repression, environmental abuse, the struggle for LGBTQ+ rights, the dethronement of patriarchal, categorical and power structures in general – are both live and have been present for some time. Despite their current high profile (or, more honestly, at this point fashionability) within the rarefied circles of arts institutions in recent times. Doğan’s graphic novel intertwines the history of the Kurdish struggle, details of prison life, the stories of fellow inmates, and the author’s own experiences, both in and prior to jail. Illustrated with images of protests, shootings, torture, demon vultures and crushed rabbits, it was created on the blank backs of letters she received from a friend that were subsequently smuggled out again. The 103 pages that comprise the work are presented side by side at Kunst Werke (another of the venues), in a large vitrine, accompanied by a 17-page booklet of translations. It’s indicative of the kind of attention asked for in this 76-artist, collectives and groups edition of the Berlin Biennale. (But hey, despite what optimists tell you, we’re still in a pandemic period of slow time, right?)  ‘In prison, the most difficult day is the first one,’ Doğan writes. ‘You feel totally disorientated. But, communal life solves this problem.’ While the experience of wandering around the biennial is by no means comparable, it’s nevertheless both comforting and ironic, given that you walk around this show masked, distanced from other potentially diseased bodies and carrying a personal set of headphones with disposable covers (to listen to the numerous video works on show), that so much of it concerns forms of solidarity. You feel atomised, isolated, at times bewildered, but are constantly reassured that so does everyone else. Mostly in far more extreme ways. And yes, there is something unavoidably kinky and voyeuristic about being one of the masked and to some degree anonymised visitors examining previously concealed histories or the opening up of complex identities: we are visitors who avoid other bodies watching other bodies opening up. Sara Sejin Chang’s video installation Four Months, Four Million Light Years (2020) describes a shamanic healing ritual in the context of the artist’s forced adoption (born in Busan, she grew up in The Netherlands) in the aftermath of the Korean War and the colonial attitudes that enabled it. Barcelona-based collective El Palomar’s delirious (and strangely erotic) two-channel video Schreber is a Woman (2020) deconstructs notions of binary identities by riffing off episodes from the memoirs (which also inspired Sigmund Freud) of the German judge Daniel Paul Schreber, who, describing experiences including feeling like a woman, was confined to a mental asylum in Saxony in 1894. A series of complex, yet extraordinary works on paper by Brenda V. Fajardo fuse tarot cards, prophetic divinations, the plight and strength of Filipino women, and scenes and texts in Tagalog decrying the ongoing corruption that continues (after multiple colonisations) to dominate life in the Philippines, seemingly in conversation with the work of Doğan and offering something of a bridge between that and the by turns surreal and fantastic paintings of Inuit artist Shuvinai Ashoona. At the Gropius Bau, the most white-boxey and institutionally formal of the biennial venues, the display takes on a more indexical flow. It opens with Sandra Gamarra Heshiki’s The Museum of Ostracism (2018), trompe-l’oeil paintings of anthropomorphic pre-Inca and Inca ceramics that have landed in various Spanish museums through commerce or plunder. Their ‘captions’ come in the form of pejorative terms for the indigenous peoples of South America that the artist has scrawled on the painting’s backs. The work is a little obvious, a little clunky, but sets the tone for a display that seeks to undermine and complexify the relationship of collections and the structures that house them to the more-or-less basic but constantly shifting (or plain shifty) stories they seek to embody, propagate and tell. By contrast, Mapa Teatro (a Colombian duo of visual and performing artists) present a more complex ethnofiction in the form of an immersive installation (comprising scenography and video) that revolves around the story of a 1969 expedition (in the year of the Apollo 12 moon landing) – comprising a trader, a fur trafficker and gold digger – and its encounter with a voluntarily isolated indigenous community, and its aftermath (only the gold digger survived, going on to create forgeries of pre-Colombian statues out of industrial debris). The biennial’s overall strategy of echoing continues in the photographs of Castiel Vitorino Brasileiro (No anitquário eu negociei o tempo, 2018), in which she poses, bare-chested in a series of faked African masks found in an antiques shop (the work also echoes The Black Mamba’s Land of the Breasted Woman, 2020, an hour-plus-long video at KW that revolves around a ‘breast tax’ in colonial India). Peppered among such works are a selection of archives, including paintings by psychiatric patients from the Museu de Arte Osório Cesar, Franco da Rocha in Brazil, and works from the reconstructed Chilean Museo de la Solidaridad Salvador Allende, originally assembled from donations by artists from around the world as an act of solidarity with the Chilean people, which was confiscated by the military, then rebuilt by the museum’s founders, who were, by then political refugees following the military coup of 1973 (and introduced by a video, in French, featuring writer Julio Cortázar).  While there’s a developing sense, as you walk though, of the potential of alternative arts institutions, built, as the Museo de la Solidaridad was, by the people for the people (on the premise that all art is political), there’s also a sense in which the process by which the voiceless are given a voice and the silenced speak loudly suggests a formula for biennials and similarly large-scale art events that becomes both cyclical (potentially cynical) and self-sustaining: foregrounding the marginalised and excluded in one biennial leaves others marginalised and excluded for the next. Cracks, after all, tend to breed further cracks. For now, however, this edition of the Berlin Biennale feels like essential viewing and one of its most rich, intriguing iterations to date.
ArtReview℗How to Get Past the Doorman at Berghain℗John Quin℗Reviews℗16/09/2020℗The Berlin nightclub transforms into an art gallery℗The portmanteau name ‘Berghain’, referring to the Kreuzberg / Friedrichshain neighbourhoods that Berlin’s most legendary nightclub straddles, could also be used as a shorthand for risky behaviour. The venue is notorious for furtive goings-on in its extensive dark rooms; here be chemsex and a heightened probability of going home with a dose of the clap. More recently, clubs like Berghain have been associated with flareups of COVID-19; for now, techno marathons are on hold. Risk-averse reviewers of a certain age, then, might be forgiven for worrying when told the club has now become a gallery. Masks on… First question: what will they do with all that space? Berghain is enormous. The former electrical power plant, with its stark concrete interior, is arguably an ideal venue for large sculptural works. Outside, a giant banner by Rirkrit Tiravanija hangs from the roof reading ‘Morgen ist die Frage’, a message super-pertinent to the moment that shouts: ‘Tomorrow is the Question’. A friend in the UK quips, ‘Yesterday is the answer’. Given Berlin’s recent history, let’s hope not. There’s no scary doorman now; no berserker Viking type with tattooed face and steel teeth threatening to rip your face off. Collectors Christian and Karen Boros (known for their private collection in a Mitte bunker) are behind the show. There are 117 artists exhibiting, all of whom are currently based in Berlin studios, hence the title. The first challenge in reviewing is Berghain’s longstanding ban on photography. Small sticky coloured dots are stuck on the camera eye of laptops and mobile phones before you enter; a half-decent memory and a notebook is an asset. All the art, we are told, belongs to the artists and is, as yet, unsold (assuming the works are for sale here, which isn’t clear). The first work we see is a permanent fixture of the venue: a sequence of 20 or so canvases by Norbert Bisky featuring boys falling out of a blue sky from an exploding plane. These chime with Die Mimik der Téthys (2019, all other works mentioned from 2020 unless stated), a massive sculpture by Julius von Bismarck found next door in the cavernous main hall: a huge buoy suspended from the ceiling by motorised wires. This bobs up and down, thus mimicking its earlier life on the sea, though it’s tempting to think of it as a coy same-sex metaphor, a sly update of Rauschenberg’s naughty Monogram (1955–59). The second obstacle is that the titles of the works were not available at the time of viewing; even the names of artists were a bit of a search. In a sense Studio Berlin is an alternative Tate Modern, an anti-Tate, if you will: a site of similar dimensions and former purpose but denuded of naff information notices and shops selling tat. Disorientation, appropriate to the venue, is a not-uncommon theme. An Islamic clock by Khaled Barakeh (One Hour is Sixty Minutes and Vice Versa) ticks disconcertingly backwards, perhaps implying we’re all out of time. Alicja Kwade shows Selbstporträt, 24 small glass vials each of which contains a chemical element, a representation of the amount of solid matter in the human body; the yellow of sulphur hints at these diabolical times, while being confronted by the minuscule quantities of stuff we’re made of underlines our general insignificance. Up in the Panorama bar (a first for this viewer, having only been allowed in the building before to see postrock at tame times of an evening) is a sculpture of a girl posing provocatively – CLIMBER (Angel Kiss) by Anna Uddenberg. Nearby, Jeremy Shaw frames what appears to be a found monochrome photograph taken in a revivalist church of a woman being blessed or healed – which he’s titled Towards Universal Pattern Recognition (Exorcism in Essex, 15-4-75) – in distorting acrylic and chrome, lending a suitably hallucinogenic effect; seeing it might be seriously discombobulating on dance nights if it’s left in situ after the show closes. Stepping carefully down another ill-lit corridor we dodge 1-32, a set of scattered giant teeth, molars and incisors made from salt by Michael Sailstorfer. Then there’s four suits of armour by Simon Fujiwara, chain-mail affairs studded with old packets of penicillin. These are called Syphilic Comrades, referring to artists (Gauguin, Goya, Toulouse-Lautrec, Van Gogh) who may or may not have had syphilis, an increasingly common risk of anonymous sex. Some of Fujiwara’s works have an autobiographical dimension; whether this fact is relevant here is unclear, but the prescriptions look real enough. There’s more reconfigured detritus as Klara Liden lights one dark passage with Tank, an orange lamp resembling a cloud and made out of a large plastic container, while Monica Bonvicini contributes Pas de Deux, one of her trademark leather-and-chain affairs, a gesture that’s perhaps a tad too obvious in the context. 
ArtReview℗From Ho Chi Minh City to Taipei, Rethinking the Practice of Exhibition-Making℗David Terrien℗Book Review℗10/09/2020℗‘From a History of Exhibitions towards a Future of Exhibition-Making: China and Southeast Asia’ drills deep into the region’s locales and art scenes℗This selection of case studies, assembled with the stated intention of establishing a baseline for the exchange of curatorial knowledge and exhibition histories across China and Southeast Asia, drills deep into the region’s locales and art scenes, from Ho Chi Minh City to Taipei, Yangon to Manila, Shanghai, Beijing and Guangzhou to Singapore and Jakarta. The texts emerged from a generously defined – and opportunistically redefined (in the sense that exhibition discourse is a field without deep roots and has needed to find its institutional nourishment where it can) – research platform put together by the volume’s editor, Biljana Ciric, following a first meeting in New Zealand in 2013. Commissioned and assembled over a period of time that has seen rapid growth in the creation of private museums and institution-based exhibitions across the region, this project is well positioned to shape a nascent discourse as well as serve as a calling card for those involved in its production. Given that it started out as a series of conferences, two of them hosted by private museums – the Rockbund Art Museum in Shanghai and the Times Museum in Guangzhou – seeking to establish themselves in a robust, professionalised ecosystem centring on the production and display of contemporary art, it is worth considering the extent to which this is a land-grab, at once justifying the need for this discourse and at the same time taking control of it.  Written by a mix of independent and institutionally affiliated curators, some big names among them, in registers ranging from narrative-based social history to academic, theory-heavy art-historical analysis, the texts in this nearly 500-page publication are clearly intended for a specialist readership, if not the very museums to which its authors might offer their services. Among the 19 included here: a standout study of Taiwan’s underground cultural scenes during the early 1990s and the influence of a nomadic figure named Wu Chung-wei, written by Wei Yu; an analysis of the unintended consequences of establishinga museum to preserve cultural traditions associated with swidden agriculture in Yunnan, southwestern China, by Maggie J. Zheng; the editor’s own contribution, a history of small- scale, artist-organised events and exhibitions in 1980s China presented as a means of commenting on how to preserve the vitality and diversity of artistic production despite the narrowing of exhibition typologies in the intervening years; Nikita Yingqian Cai’s investigation into the legacy of the members of the Big Tail Elephant collective and their meticulous strategic evasions of the market’s reach and corruptions; two texts by Patrick D. Flores, one positing the ‘exhibition as a problematic’ in the development of a ‘dislocal’ via the figure of Filipino artist Roberto Feleo, another focused on the emergence of abstraction in a 1953 Manila exhibition; an incisive recounting, by Di Liu, of artist collective ruangrupa’s first foray into Mainland China, a 2018 visit to Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Chengdu; an analysis, by Julia Hartmann, of differing approaches to organising exhibitions of ‘women’s art’ in 1990s China and how they reflect and respond to emerging female consciousness in both the artists and society; and so much more. Ciric has divided the project into three loosely defined time periods, aiming to trace the ways in which exhibition-making has evolved in the region over the past half-century, from artist-organised exhibitions and events during the 1970s and 80s, to the effects of accelerating internationalisation and standardisation during the 1990s, the rise of institutions as the locus for contemporary art discourse, the proliferation of biennales, the influx of Western institutions, the legacy of colonialism in exhibition rituals and the growth in the art market from the 2000s, all with consequences for how art, in turn, is created. There is surely an undersold and invaluable aspect to this project: the gathering of texts that serve to archive exhibitions mounted in ways, places and times that have made such histories scattered and fragile, for presentation to a global audience of art historians, curators and critics. But in their very diversity of locales and subjects, and in their highly detailed focus, these same texts struggle to work together to provide a comprehensive view of the region. As a pretext for gathering these histories, the promotion of exhibition discourse in the region makes perfect sense, but it begs the question of whether it is possible or even desirable to marshal such diversity into singularity.
ArtReview℗Considering Love in the Age of COVID-19℗Oliver Basciano℗Book Review℗10/09/2020℗‘What We Don’t Talk About When We Talk About Love’ gathers canonical texts around the theme of love – poignant reading in the pains of isolation℗Reactions to the isolation forced on people around the world during the COVID-19 pandemic tend to have fallen into one of two camps. The first sees, in horror, the destruction of any sense of productivity and a collapse into apathy; the second assumes that the period of quarantine provided a unique moment for creativity and self-improvement as professional projects, trips and obligations were put on hold. Aveek Sen is in the latter camp. Working with Kolkata gallery Experimenter, the writer and curator convened a series of Zoom-based seminars – ‘critical but candid discussions’ – around the theme of love.  This digital publication, a riposte to Raymond Carver’s celebrated 1981 short-story collection, gathers the texts that served as references during those conferences – canonical literature such as Aristophanes’s eulogy to love from Plato’s Symposium (c. 385–320 BCE) and the sometimes controversial poet and scholar A. K. Ramanujan’s 1971 ‘Love Poem for a Wife’ – as well as films and music, embedded as hyperlinks. An essay by Sen on Björk’s song ‘Hyperballad’, for example, features the cover art for the album on which it appears and a link to Michel Gondry’s promotional video. When life is lived online, this erasure of geography and genre seems fitting. This is not just a useful resource for the romantically inclined. It tackles the concept of love as a dangerous and damaging feeling too. A text by Sen, originally published in 2008 in The Telegraph India, concerning the bizarre story that a British judge had annulled a marriage after it was discovered that the couple were separated-at-birth twins, introduces a series of texts by the seminar’s participants reacting to this seemingly tabloid story. Of the assortment of poems and prose replicated here, Priya Thakur’s short fictional letter is the most affecting – given the pains of isolation under which this book was produced, the emotion is presented as a double-edged sword. ‘Life gets in the way of love,’ she writes. ‘I don’t know what shape my love remains in anymore. But I know that I love you, always and forever.’
ArtReview℗In Post-Quarantine New York, Artist Davina Semo’s Bells Disturb the Peace℗Sam Korman℗Reviews℗03/09/2020℗The installation ‘Reverberation’ – five neon-orange bells in Brooklyn Bridge Park – invites mischief from any passerby℗Davina Semo’s installation Reverberation overlooks Manhattan from an inviting stretch of Brooklyn Bridge Park, on the other side of the East River. There, the artist has installed five neon-orange bells, each one strung from sturdy aluminium frame. Even on the overcast day I make my visit, they glisten beautifully against the backdrop of the harbour, the low light shining through the unique constellations of holes that perforate each one. Yet, in spite of their enticing exterior, it’s the chain attached to the clapper that eventually proves to be their most inviting feature. Jerking it back and forth works up a satisfying – and deafening – clamour. It’s impossible not to read Semo’s project in relation to Lower Manhattan. Reverberation’s raucousness speaks to the tension between the two boroughs – asking of the imperious skyline, ‘Oh, you think you’re better than me?’ But I’m not the only person with a message to send. A guy in his late thirties raps the clapper for almost a minute, then proudly struts past me having clearly enjoyed himself. Later, a twenty-something yuppy tugs on the chains for a stroke or two before retreating to his girlfriend, who pats him on the back, knowing he’s got it out of his system. Unfortunately, I never see a woman ring a bell, though one particularly gothy teen circles the installation the whole time I’m there. Nerves get the better of her. I truly hope she finds another way to let it out, whatever it may be. Semo’s project comfortably inhabits postquarantine New York. On one hand, these participatory artworks stand in for the renaissance of public space New Yorkers are currently enjoying (at least until winter arrives). With restaurants claiming parking spots for café seating, parks playing host to every birthday party and certain streets closed to traffic, life has been brought down to the level of the pedestrian. On the other hand, the bells are emblematic of the widespread upheavals overtaking the United States: they permit any passerby to disturb the peace. Yet Reverberation no more seeks to reconcile the public’s seemingly contradictory intentions for occupying public space – normalisation versus radicalisation, socialisation versus individual expression – than it predicts which one will predominate in American politics. Rather, it speaks to the tension that pervades any public encounter, availing itself of the public platform to stoke the average person’s penchant for mischief.
ArtReview℗Copenhagen’s Summer Exhibitions: Timely and Timeless℗Rodney LaTourelle℗City Reports℗28/08/2020℗A confirmation of how essential art is to processing our current crises-ridden realities℗Gallerygoing in person around Copenhagen in midsummer was not only a much needed psychic respite post-coronavirus-lockdown but also a profound confirmation of how essential art – even prepandemic art – is to picturing and processing our current crises-ridden realities and bringing them to bear, both intimately and communally. Located at Refshaleøen, a former industrial island in the city’s harbour, Copenhagen Contemporary is a relatively recent but welcome initiative in the city’s expanding art scene. Using its unique location – a decommissioned ship-welding hall – as a base to commission large site-specific installations since 2016, the institution presents contemporary art of all dimensions and media. Delayed in opening, the planned exhibition In Focus: Statements was quickly reimagined in response to the uncertainties of COVID-19 and in light of the global antiracist protests in the wake of George Floyd’s murder in America. The show, already a response to #MeToo, the rise of authoritarianism and other crises, was expanded with a number of outdoor public installations added to the indoor component (in which the curators utilised nontraditional locations such as stairwells and service spaces in addition to the galleries). Specifically, In Focus: Statements is a potent reexamination of older, current and commissioned text-based work in a variety of media, increasingly relevant in the wake of shifting digital communication platforms that have transmuted written forms in the sociopolitical context, from slogans to hashtags and memes. Including artists such as Zoe Leonard, Jenny Holzer, David Shrigley and Sam Durant, the exhibition emphasises the raw power of language through unexpected display contexts. On a ragged hill behind the institution, for example, Marilyn Minter’s Resist Flag (2017), the command written in a spraypaintlike font, flies on nine preexisting flagpoles above Less Power Less (2020), a text-sculpture spelled out in used automobile tires during a performance by Hesselholdt &amp; Mejlvang in which the female artist duo’s constructed ‘goddess’ attire got increasingly dirty. Nearby, we encounter Dread Scott’s A Man Was Lynched by Police Yesterday (2015), in which the artist updated an NAACP flag that marked lynching of Black people in the US between 1920 and 1938, adding the critical words ‘by police’. In Kae Tempest’s moving performance of ‘Hold Your Own’, made during lockdown amidst the everyday surroundings of the poet’s studio, the vulnerability and intimacy of the spoken word-style delivery is concentrated in messy details like wayward strands of unbrushed fabric clinging to their sweater. Tempest’s words echo from a monitor installed in a decaying bunker, located a brisk walk away from the institution on the edge of the Refshaleøen island, during which one passes a previously unrealised version of John Giorno’s bittersweet Rainbow Paintings (2015–17) that float sharp existential slogans (such as ‘Life Is a Killer’) over blissed-out colour gradients. Back inside the institution, Kahlil Joseph’s BLKNWS (2018) reclaims ‘TV news’ from a Black perspective, taking back narrative control in a simultaneously political and entertaining montage, and Tony Cokes’s video The Morrissey Problem (2019) employs bare text on monochrome grounds for a pitch-perfect assessment of the singer’s slide from misfit hero to out-of-touch blowhard. What ties these works together, it appears, is their demonstration of how text can be activated in a sociopolitical context and, in civic space, in a direct address to the public. In the centre of the city, at Kunsthal Charlottenborg, the exhibition DIS presents: What Do People Do All Day? takes place over six rooms, each outfitted as a familiar environment such as a kitchen or living room that extends the videowork on display into three dimensions, effectively employing the screen as a sculptural element. Known for their internet-based ‘archeology of contemporary life’ that feeds on advertising, fashion and lifestyle tropes, the NYC collaborative DIS selected videos from their streaming platform dis.art in sympathy with their current preoccupations, which centre on the nature of work, value and power amidst our technocapitalist present. Numerous videos are shown in the introductory room on screens incorporated into a wall-based entertainment unit featuring an electric fireplace and minibar, emphasising DIS’s ‘edutainment’ sensibility. In their General Intellects with McKenzie Wark (Paul B. Preciado) (2017), Wark’s disembodied head describes Preciado’s theory of the body as a mode of production itself, while DIS and Hannah Black’s video What’s in the Box? with Hannah Black featuring Zahira Kelly &amp; Precious Okoyomon (2018) presents a refreshingly irreverent interview in which Black female activist Zahira Kelly speaks to racial accountability online while countering notions of prescriptive privileged ‘radicals’. Throughout the exhibition, a woven carpet by DIS featuring a range of faux bodily stains, grease and tire tracks allows the visitor to comfortably recline and absorb the lengthy videos at their discretion while concentrating the tensions between the simulated and the corporal, not to mention horror and leisure. The title of the exhibition, What Do People Do All Day?, comes from Simon Dybbroe Møller’s eponymous video series (after Richard Scarry’s children’s book of the same name) that explores contemporary notions of ‘dead labour’ in the context of the gig economy and the cinematic conception of sex and intimacy as freedom. In a reflexive gesture, lounging skeletons watch Møller’s video on a flat panel display as if screen time has immobilised their absent atrophied flesh, which in turn aligns with corresponding carpet stains. KØS Museum of Art in Public Spaces [sic] is located in a renovated industrial hall just south of Copenhagen in the town of Køge. Unravel the Unfound examines the work of Gordon Matta-Clark from a social and political perspective, including an extensive range of photographic documentation, books, notebooks and artefacts. An exceptionally articulate portrait of the American artist’s later work, the exhibition opens with a room devoted to film and photographs documenting the artist’s living artwork Food (1971–74), a community restaurant established with numerous collaborators that doubled as relational art work avant la lettre. Characterised by Matta-Clark’s removal of the wall between the kitchen and dining spaces (a section of architecture later exhibited), the restaurant’s communal programme and crossing of traditional conceptual and architectural boundaries also prefigured the architectural-scale cuts that defined his later work.
ArtReview℗‘Minor Detail’: Adania Shibli’s Novel About Helplessness℗Nirmala Devi℗Book Review℗28/08/2020℗A horrifying act committed by an Israeli platoon in 1949 sets in motion a tale in which all roads towards agency are revealed to be dead ends℗This is a novel, translated from the original Arabic, about helplessness, a sensation that, for a variety of reasons, many of us may feel we have had to get used to over the past several months. Here however is a calculated description of helplessness in the extreme, in which all roads towards agency and action, change or transformation, are revealed to be dead ends. And it’s a journey rendered all the more moving by the subtlety of the story’s form and the elegance of its craft. Whether that is in any way redemptive or only something that serves to heighten a sense of loss is for readers to decide. Split into two parts, Minor Detail begins with an account of the events leading up to the rape and murder of a young Arab woman by a platoon of Israeli soldiers in the Negev desert in 1949. The action is set following the creation of the state of Israel a year earlier, its further conquest of Arab lands and the flight or expulsion of 726,000 Palestinians from its territory. The narrative is told in the third person, often coldly analytic in tone, and focused on the platoon leader. His body is rotting, infected following an insect bite. He obsessively searches for and exterminates any stray arachnids in his hut. He obsessively patrols the desert for any stray Arabs. Those he finds, he and his platoon kill. He is appalled by the stench of the young woman. He goes through endless bars of soap. Whatever she says he cannot understand. The only emotional presence in the narrative comes in the shape of the victim’s dog. And no one can understand it either. The second part is told from the first-person perspective of a Palestinian woman living in Ramallah today. Having read an account of the earlier incident in a newspaper, she becomes obsessed with tracing its detail. Which, following a conversation with the seemingly uninterested author of the newspaper account, proves not so easy to find. She seems embarrassed by her obsession. ‘Incidents like that aren’t out of the ordinary,’ she says apologetically, referring primarily, it seems, to the normalisation of such horrors in the years since 1949. Before justifying her interest on the coincidental basis that the life of the unnamed victim of part one was ended on a morning exactly 25 years before hers began. And apologising, again, for any awkwardness caused by her incidental revelations about the quotidian detail – soldiers, checkpoints and curfews – of her life under Israeli occupation. As a result of which she is, among other things, used to guns and scared of dogs. As for the rest, she seems to want to resensitise herself. To return the new ordinary to the extraordinary. To what it really is. It’s in the least significant details that art historians can discern the genuine from the fake, she points out. As her need to justify herself increases. ‘Others claim, based on the same idea, that it is possible to reconstruct something’s appearance or an incident one has never witnessed, simply by noticing various little details which others claim to be insignificant,’ she continues, seeking further to explain her actions. She’s anxious (whether by nature or nurture remains unclear), obsessed with dusting (particularly after the bombing of neighbouring buildings leaves detritus on her workstation) and can’t sleep. So she takes a roadtrip to the site of the 1949 incident. After hiring a car in someone else’s name. And travelling (illegally) past checkpoints using someone else’s photo ID. Only by not being herself can she travel, only by not being herself can she access the past. Even when it appears as if she has gained agency, her expedition will ultimately demonstrate that she has not. In both parts of the book, we’re reminded of the novel’s opening line: ‘Nothing moved except the mirage’. As the ‘I’s in her narrative tick over like the miles on her car’s odometer, her name is never revealed. Just as the Arabic place names have been removed (Arab bodies having been removed following the massacres and murders in 1949) from the landscape through which she travels. And yes, that does lead to an additional sense of awkwardness when reading this book in translation, as the connections between form and meaning become all-consuming. But that only serves to enhance this book’s power. While this is ostensibly a tale about the banality of brutality and the ability of the powerful to erase the powerless, Adania Shibli’s novel, and Elisabeth Jaquette’s translation, are an extraordinary masterclass in how to do things with words and the lacunae in between. 
ArtReview℗‘Pago Pago’: the Art of Latiff Mohidin℗Adeline Chia℗Reviews℗25/08/2020℗An exhibition at National Gallery Singapore traces the Malaysian modernist painter-poet’s eccentric but compelling personal philosophy℗‘Pago Pago’ is a term coined by Malaysian artist-poet Latiff Mohidin during the late 1950s to describe the cosmopolitan yet regionally rooted spirit with which he made art. For the next decade or so, as he travelled through Southeast Asia, his style coalesced around a signature motif – paintings showing one or more columns whose details are inspired by plant life and architecture. This exhibition, which features over 80 artworks as well as texts and archival documents, explores Pago Pago’s incarnations over the years. It positions Pago Pago as a Southeast Asian brand of modernism, described by the curators as ‘a way of thinking and working that sought to challenge the dominance of Western modernism at that time’. Rehabilitating Asian modernisms into global art-history, as well as discovering intra-regional connections, are pet projects at the National Gallery Singapore. Indeed, elements of Latiff ’s work fit into such a narrative, as there is some decolonial pushback to his art, especially after his exposure to European modern-art movements in Germany, where he studied during the 1960s. One of his driving questions was, ‘How does one advance the mediums of painting, drawing and writing to suit local milieus outside Europe and America?’ A sense of friendly regionalism is also present, given his acquaintances with other Southeast Asian artists. No doubt, the ‘SEA modernism’ angle on Pago Pago is a worthy one, but it is not the only story to be told. What strikes me more forcefully about Pago Pago is that it is a sustained feat of self-fashioning. Pago Pago is less a neatly conceived series than a snowballing of ideas and experiences of a young man moving through the world, and a project driven by an eccentric but compelling personal philosophy, as evidenced by the selection of Latiff’s writing on display. Born in 1941, in Seremban, Malaysia, and displaying talent from a young age, Latiff gained a scholarship to study art at the Hochschule für Bildende Künste in West Berlin in his late teens. There he was exposed to art movements like Cubism and Futurism, which imprinted on his paintings a bold, flat and graphic style. His early poststudent works, such as Karam (Shipwreck, 1964), showing the capsized bows of tongkangs sticking out of the water like horns, demonstrate his predilection for curved shapes. As he travelled through Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam, that basic shape would take on other connotations – the ‘flying eaves’ of temples, the voluptuous outlines of apsaras, the tender buds of ginger roots and bamboo shoots. The term Pago Pago came out of a fusion of East and West. During a visit to an ethnological museum in Berlin, he saw ancient artefacts from Asia and South America. One of his drawings of the displays is titled Pagoden (1961), German for pagodas. He dropped the ‘den’. As for the repeated ‘pago’, his Minangkabau roots come into play: the traditional houses of this community in West Sumatra are adorned with carvings called pagar pagar, pronounced as ‘pago pago’. Pago Pago evolved with Latiff’s travels. Generally, the works before 1965 include more recognisable totemic structures. They depict templelike buildings made up of stacked blocks rendered in cheerful pastels, as seen in Pagoda i i (1964), or a single grey brutalist tower in Pago Pago ii (1965). Or they could be weird monsters. PROVOKE (1965) depicts a confrontation between three totems. Two have hooks and curved blades coming out of them, evoking complicated weaponry and ‘primitive’ art, motifs that could be drawn from his own cultural ancestry or a byproduct of his exposure to Western modernism – which speaks to the cheerful syncretism of his style. During the late 1960s the totems soften and open up into looser, sinuous forms, such as the arterial tubes intertwining in Two Standing Figures (1968) and the juicy stems crisscrossing in Tropical Growth (1968). Besides the art, another pleasure of the show is encountering Latiff’s writing, abstracted and printed on the wall texts, not least for its insights into his paintings. After his visit to Angkor Wat, where many of the temples have tree roots growing out of walls, he noted two basic forces in the world: ‘One is the venture of man, ever desiring to claim the sky. The other God’s own creation, ever spreading, establishing, sinking deep into the ground (looking for water).’ This war between the up and down, civilisation and nature, can be seen in his sketches of the Angkor temples, but they also reflect a general quality in his Pago Pago paintings: their lively sense of movement and an interplay between the manmade and the organic. Part of the exhibition attempts to map Pago Pago’s evolution alongside historical events. Malam Merah (Red Night) (1968), which features angry brushstrokes and a central subject being riven against a red background, was allegedly inspired by his experiences travelling through Northern Thailand during the Vietnam War. But as with most art, while external events may shape the output, an inner logic is probably also at work. Take the ending of the series: Latiff puts the date at 1969, the year Sino-Malay riots broke out in Kuala Lumpur, on 13 May. It is also the year he went to study printmaking at Pratt Institute in New York. ‘Some say Pago Pago froze in America,’ he writes. ‘Maybe. But I knew something else was emerging.’ The last painting in the show, Untitled (Neo Pago Pago) (1971), can be read as a transition work. It still has the central subject, this time suggestive of a figure holding an easel and wearing a tie. But the edges are smooth, with none of the serrated contours of the early works, and the clean, flat colouration has a sense of stillness. The palette of sand, red and turquoise is warm and sun-drenched – the effect of light from a different place. 
ArtReview℗‘Meditations in an Emergency’, UCCA, Beijing Review: Fragility in a Post-COVID-19 World℗Sylvia Xue Bai℗Reviews℗18/08/2020℗What is rare and what is in excess have been subverted during the pandemic℗In some parts of the globe, it seems, one can prudently resume life in a post-COVID-19 world. In May, UCCA Beijing opened its first show of 2020, Meditations in an Emergency, inviting viewers to ‘meditate’ here. Wearing masks makes me hear my breathing distinctly, and the rhythm already puts me into a premeditative state. In Taipei/Berlin-based artist Musquiqui Chihying’s three-channel videowork The Alp (2014), a single bed appears raised five metres up on a wooden frame, while an even taller streetlamp illuminates it. The bed (this time with a metal frame) is also present in the gallery, installed next to the video. In the video, a man suffering from insomnia attempts to sleep, and adopts a bed in three acts, each shown on a separate channel: first, on a mattress installed in a large chest freezer at a supermarket stacked with packaged food; then on the open land of a meadow under the Alps, where a rifle fitted with a bayonet hovers above him; and finally, he is seated on the bed, possibly in a stable, with a horse pacing around. Once something that busy metropolites had to fight for, peaceful sleeping time is now plentifully available to us – perhaps in an isolation ward or here, on this high bed. What is rare and what is in excess have been subverted during the pandemic, and the first part of the show, ‘The Fragile Everyday’, calls into question the obsession with normality or the attempt to bring back normal order of any kind. In the second part, ‘Vital Signs’, we are forced to confront the biological signs of life – after all, expensive ECMO machines, now frequently mentioned in the press, have become part of our everyday vocabulary. Such a machine’s purpose is to keep humans alive. Li Liao, however, wants to accomplish more in life than just breathing. He takes it to the ironic extreme in his video To Be a Better Man (2019), in which he exercises his core muscles while reciting English every day. After a year his perfect six-pack abs are overlaid by the sound and text of his English reading, pounding (his abs and the superimposed text) in front of our eyes. The self-motived middle-class can do more than just breathe. ‘Beyond Animality’ and ‘Othered Movements’ reconsider the condition of interactions between humans and animals. Last Cat on Christmas Island (2016) charts Robert Renhui Zhao’s quasi-photographic documentary and quasi-science-fictional annotations of his natural-research project, in response to the use of feral-cat trapping devices on the island. In the form of digital prints of variable sizes, he portrays the peculiar biological populations, natural phenomena and topographical landmarks of Christmas Island. Human habitation introduced many invasive species to the island, yet to protect the local ecology now, humans need to hunt down the very cats that they once ‘brought in’. What a paradox (but these days a far from uncommon one). Humans dictate the lifespan of a species, just because they can. Zhao’s matter-of-fact layout resembles a trusted scientific source. It is a quiet work, and meditative. Hsu Chia-Wei’s four-channel video installation Black and White – Malayan Tapir (2018) is nothing if not loud, both aurally and visually. It is full of overlapping images, competing captions and encyclopaedic illustrations, yet is also reflective: even the naming of a species is an entanglement between politics, colonialist history and art-historical categorisation – all forms of human footprint. More familiar names like Wolfgang Tillmans, Pierre Huyghe, Mika Rottenberg, Zhang Hui, Zhang Peili and Yang Fudong also offer their angles on meditation. In Section 5, ‘Out of Focus’, Tillmans’s 34 laser prints Time/Mirrored Installation Beijing (2020) is the newest iteration of his ‘Time/Mirrored’ series, made specifically for this exhibition. Texts and images are printed with an ordinary office printer in A3 and A4 pages, and are affixed to the wall with tape. The smaller arrangements of this work accentuate the connections between images and texts, and even appear a little bit makeshift, perhaps resembling one of Tillmans’s thinking boards. But the texts he shares can also be astonishing: ‘Martin Luther King Jr’s “I have a dream” speech was 27 years prior to 1990. 27 years past 1990, Donald J Trump was sworn in as the President of the United States.’ The lightness of the papers and the weight of the stated facts offer another paradox. And these ‘mirrored’ historical events serve to recontextualise both the past and the present. Postquarantine (in Beijing for now), we meditate on meditations made by others during their quarantine.
ArtReview℗Intimacy and Urgency: Exhibitions to See in Los Angeles℗Cat Kron℗City Reports℗14/08/2020℗From Ricky Swallow’s Borrowed Sculptures to Van Hanos’s Interiors, navigating LA galleries amid protests, lockdowns and curfews℗A sensorial vertigo afflicts many East Coast transplants, enhanced by blinding sunlight and the ambient hum of air conditioners and helicopters. Early this spring, however, access to outside stimuli was cut. Meanwhile water was still scarce, and the air felt suddenly precious – newly coveted and feared. In March, soon after quarantine, I began taking drives to the only acquaintances it was safe to visit in close range. I counted myself lucky to have a means of escape from my apartment that most of my New York-based friends, and the less fortunate citizens of this city, did not. I drove a rinky-dink 2007 Prius Hybrid with reasonable fuel efficiency and thus allowed myself this luxury. The inviolability one feels in a car has long been passed off as an excuse for selfish behaviour behind the wheel; it took on an additional false sense of hermetically sealed security, as from behind closed windows I spent mornings observing and photographing notable trees of Los Angeles’s East Side. With galleries, libraries and other nonessential businesses and centres closed, these trees provided a respite from the visual monotony of unmarked days, just as driving provided a bodily reprieve from the confines of my apartment. I made regular pilgrimages to a Moreton Bay fig in Pasadena. Brought to California from Australia during the 1870s as specimen trees to beautify and enhance rapidly developing urban landscapes, Moreton Bay figs revealed over time their ability to grow to more than 60 metres in height, their exposed ‘buttressed’ roots now sprawling across sidewalks. Pasadena, with its palatial estates, is now one of the only residential neighbourhoods where this solemn, patiently elephantine tree is not in danger of being cut down. In the car I listened to Roberta Flack’s Hey, That’s No Way to Say Goodbye (1969) on repeat. Many loved before us. I know we are not new. In city and in forest they loved like me and you. In May, LA galleries began to cautiously reopen, adding appointment registries to their websites and implementing visitor caps and mandatory masks for entry. Then one more Black citizen was brutally murdered by a white law officer, and the scales tipped. I am not the right person to speak to this, and the piece I set out to write is about galleries and trees. I am trying instead to listen to others, better versed and equipped. The next month, amid protests, lockdowns and curfews, I registered to see Ricky Swallow’s Borrowed Sculptures at David Kordansky Gallery in Mid-City. The Australian-born Angeleno’s latest sculptures continue his work recreating domestic materials in cast and painted bronze, their impressive trompe l’oeil effect overshadowed by the delicacy of their readymade referents. One lone form, Stringer (2020), whose motif suggested a stair rendered from coils of rope, graced the gallery’s southern wall like a Celtic knot. A bronze rocking chair, Rocking Chair with Rope (meditation chair # I) (2020), cast from a model in the artist’s studio, appeared to hang, as though suspended from bronze ropes strung to a nonexistent ceiling-mounted hook, with the tensile restraint of a Fred Sandback installation. I shared the gallery with only one other visitor. Another stood patiently at the door, waiting for one of us leave. I made an appointment at Château Shatto downtown to see Van Hanos’s Interiors. Characteristically virtuosic (the New York-based artist, who recently relocated to Marfa, is among the most facile painters currently working) and teasingly referential, this new set of works demonstrated stirrings in the evolution of Hanos’s conflicted attitude towards the heroic oil painting. Among the exhibition’s largest canvases, Interior (2020) ensconced a deadpan ‘pictorial’ painterly view out from a paned window within a palette-knife-scraped frame that made explicit allusions to Gerhard Richter. The adjacent, modestly scaled Eagle, Crow, Snake, Fish Face (2020) took this reference to its art-historical endpoint: here the artist had used this chromatically striated scraped canvas as an underpainting, burying it beneath a coat of Ad Reinhardt-esque black before scraping a portrait onto its surface to reveal its base as if it were a Rainbow Scratch craft paper. The appointment system was itself new and strange. I’d previously tried to see shows with as few preconceptions as possible. (Although with galleries strewn across miles and potentially hours of traffic, this had already proved somewhat impractical.) On the other hand, these restrictions were conversely appealing when you remembered summer openings of prior years – edging past clots of sweaty revellers to see the work they were standing in front of. An appointment made a visit intentional; the visitor cap created a dual sense of intimacy and urgency. Masks, on the other hand, are simply a present necessity as well as a gesture of respect and appreciation for the many people who make these visits possible. I discovered a trio of shrubs pruned in the shape of giraffes in a garden I can only appreciatively describe as extremely whimsical, and was tipped off to the location of a yucca whose trunk resembled musculature riddled with bulging cysts. The days grew hotter earlier. On cool mornings, however, it finally seemed safe again to climb the 383 stairs off La Loma – huffing through a mask, passing a young oak whose bow had extended into the pathway and been tagged with a red ribbon so that walkers wouldn’t hit their heads. Like the Moreton Bay fig, the oak can grow to massive proportions. Unlike the imported tree, it is native to California, and its nutritionally dense acorns historically provided sustenance for indigenous peoples.
ArtReview℗Why John Cage Was Mad About Mushrooms℗Oliver Basciano℗Book Review℗11/08/2020℗‘John Cage: A Mycological Foray’ tracks the American composer’s adventures into the world of fungi℗It might seem of niche biographical interest that composer John Cage was an enthusiastic amateur mycologist, but such was his passion that it undoubtedly came to influence his music. ‘I have come to the conclusion that much can be learned about music by devoting oneself to the mushroom,’ he is quoted as saying in this new two-volume study of the American’s forays into the world of fungi, which includes, alongside texts by writers, artists and curators, a reproduction of Cage’s 1972 Mushroom Book and his 1983 poem ‘Mushrooms et Variationes’. Cage was not interested in the psychoactive qualities of shrooms – he never took drugs in his life, he said. Indeed, though he cofounded the New York Mycological Society and appeared on an Italian quiz show with ‘toadstool’ as his specialist subject, it seems less the shrooms themselves and more the act of foraging for them that inspired his musical work. Cage went to Stony Point, in upstate New York, in 1954 to establish an electronic music studio but was sidetracked into the local woods. His burgeoning hobby got off to a bad start when he misidentified a specimen, eating a poisonous hellebore that left him hospitalised. It would seem that the life-and-death potential of his mycological pursuits offered a useful contrast to the extreme freedom granted by avant-garde composing.  ‘In the mushrooms it’s absolutely necessary you see if you’re going to eat them as I do, not to eat one which is deadly. Whereas I take the attitude in music that no sounds are deadly. It’s like the Zen statement that every day is a beautiful day. Everything is pleasing providing you haven’t got the notion of pleasing and displeasing in you.’ Where composing, according to Cage, should be concerned with chance and disharmony, mycology was bound by strict rules, making this hobby an important counter-weight to his profession.
ArtReview℗The Thrill of Discovery? What to See in New York Galleries℗Rahel Aima℗City Reports℗06/08/2020℗Surprises, naked calculation and the thrill of discovery℗Late in May, as New York City morgues reached capacity and bodies were relegated to refrigerated trucks parked outside hospitals, a corpse flower began to bloom for the first time. Located in the Barnard College campus greenhouse, its brief flowering – just 24–36 hours, once every decade or so – was broadcast on the institution’s YouTube channel. It felt a little on the nose, but what does a plant know? I tried watching the livestream, but I had had enough of staring at things, at screens of video art, of virtual anything. Given all that, as galleries themselves started cautiously opening up over the last few weeks, you’d think I would have been hyped. But even as the worst is decidedly over in NYC – albeit just beginning in other states – the tide of police brutality continues unabated. The country is aflame with ongoing protests, unemployment remains rampant and a catastrophic eviction crisis looms when courts reopen this month. Going out to see art felt a long way down the list of priorities. There wasn’t even all that much open: some spaces will remain closed until the art season’s traditional post-summer-vacation reopening in early September. Some are moving to cheaper neighbourhoods, or joining the new locus forming in TriBeCa. Some have closed permanently or, in the case of Gavin Brown, are ‘merging’ with Chelsea stalwarts like Gladstone to form new mega-galleries. Nevertheless, at the end of July I dutifully called and emailed and made appointments (offered at 10- or 30-minute intervals), and hopped on the train for the first time since March. There’s a particular way I like to see art in Chinatown and the Lower East Side. Get off the F train at East Broadway and hit up Reena Spaulings. Wind my way first eastwards then westwards, making hairpin turns to cover each street between Norfolk and the Bowery, Canal and Houston, stopping for bubble tea (almond, 75 percent sugar – liquid marzipan), snacks and later drinks, sometimes meeting others. Seeing absolutely everything that’s currently on. I never studied art history, see: for years I didn’t trust my own conclusions, and compensated by seeing everything, at least Downtown and in Chelsea. Today, although I’m more sure of my convictions, the routine stands.  The first surprise was the subway. It came on time, it was spotlessly clean and everyone was wearing masks and observing social-distancing practices: a fleeting vision of what it might be like to live in a functioning city and not a failed state. The second was realising that the safety-first, ‘by appointment only’ routines at the galleries were mostly empty theatre. At one appointment, I arrived to find the gallery locked and the phone ringing unanswered. Others that didn’t require appointments were randomly closed despite their stated hours. Only two places asked me for my details, presumably to allow for contact tracing down the line. Not every gallerist or visitor was wearing a mask, though most of the time I was the only visitor. In the end, apart from the occasional bottle of hand sanitiser perched by the gallery guestbook, not much was different.  The biggest surprise, however, was how few of the shows I saw responded to the current moment. At most, there were awkward links to the ongoing Movement for Black Lives, as in Billy White’s solo at Shrine, which was postponed as a result of COVID-19, but now, according to the gallery, ‘has taken on more poignant meanings and a sense of urgency in light of the recent calls to action’. Why this might be the case is unclear, but the loose paintings of celebrities depicted mostly in profile – Elvis, Eddie Murphy, Joe DiMaggio, Fred Flintstone with a bloodied mouth – and small melty ceramics are exceedingly charming nonetheless. The paintings in particular have a layered quality that suggests an accumulation of multiple characters painted over each other, like a time-lapsed face or a 1990s music video. A number of untitled works feature a uniformed man in blue, which, along with a small ceramic police car, seems to hint at the complicated figure of the Black cop. At Essex Street, Park McArthur directly addressed the twinned crises of breathing with a spare, sterile show that included a sculpture made from her ventilator’s filters – needed for reasons unrelated to the current pandemic – which hangs near the open gallery doors. The bulk of the show features a framed printout, blue ink on white paper, installed by the gallery elevator and on the mezzanine floor below. It depicts the markings on a device known as an incentive spirometer, which provides users with a volumetric measurement of their breath and encourages deep breathing. The text is rendered backwards, the way it might look if we were somehow inside the spirometer; the effect is to turn the gallery into a kind of breathing apparatus. Here too is McArthur’s characteristic emphasis on access: the exhibition also exists online, with robust, descriptive alt text captions, and as a described audio and video guide. Elsewhere I found myself especially drawn to paintings that were subtly appliquéd, perhaps relishing the fact that they would read so differently in jpeg form. In a group show at Thierry Goldberg, Bony Ramirez’s colourful paintings featured voluptuous, muscly figures in littoral or tropical settings, carrying swords, seashells and swans. Their curving hands and feet are especially memorable, suggesting a cross between webbed, amphibious creatures and Roald Dahl’s witches. But this is no Caribbean idyll: some figures are being stabbed in the head, in the manner of Peter of Verona, or in a hand. In the compelling El Mar Que Extraño / I Miss The Ocean (2020), the figure walks on a bed of hobby blades stuck onto the canvas. Biblical themes also pervaded Emmanuel Louisnord Desir’s intriguing, sinewy wood-and-metal installations – and first-ever solo – at 47 Canal. For their fresh visual vocabulary and inventive use of materials, both are definitely young artists to watch, reminding me of that forgotten pleasure of discovery upon encountering a new-to-me artist. Is it just the thrill of novelty? I’m reminded why I love seeing art and being surprised by art despite everything else going on in the artworld, from the dirty money that funds it to the revelations of systemic racial discrimination and abuse, as documented by new Instagram accounts like @cancelartgalleries. That as nakedly calculating as galleries’ sudden interest in showing very young POC and especially Black artists is, audiences can only benefit. In a two-person show at Rachel Uffner, Arghavan Khosravi’s muted paintings on canvas and fabric feature a photorealistic female subject, doubled or tripled as if captured with a stereoscopic camera. Sometimes the cloth is left unpainted – a busy paisley stands in for yoga pants, for example, and in one work, threads and the tassels of a printed cotton tapestry add textural interest. But it is the marvellously weird solo upstairs, of work by Curtis Talwst Santiago, that really excites: glass noses – the kind that were once lopped off Ancient Egyptian statues to make them appear less African, apparently; paintings with incandescently red-faced knights; a tiny diorama in a box; and an enormous suit of arms made out of beadwork.   
ArtReview℗Artist Jun Sojung Maps the Cosmopolitan Consciousness℗Andy St. Louis℗Reviews℗03/08/2020℗The Korean artist’s new work looks to the capital cities of Korea, France and Japan for inspiration℗Amid the dimly lit environs of the underground exhibition hall at Atelier Hermès, Jun Sojung’s compact exhibition takes shape around a central video that traverses time and space in jumps and skips. Jun is the current recipient of the biennial Hermès Foundation Missulsang, which ranks among the nation’s most prestigious art prizes and is awarded to a promising Korean artist whose work reflects the contemporary condition. Her narrative videos typically deconstruct storytelling conventions and thematise the transference of individual agency; in recent years, Jun’s works have presented character studies of a range of individuals in specialised skill-based occupations, including a tightrope walker, a piano tuner, a sign painter and a shellfish diver. Despair to be reborn (2020) is a 25-minute single-channel video that considers the psycho-geography of modern cities by tracing literal passageways and routes that link distinct physical sites in the urban landscape as well as the cognitive shortcuts and detours that collectively map the cosmopolitan consciousness. In so doing, Jun interweaves imagery and voices from Korea, Japan and France in a fragmented trajectory that alternates between archival footage from the 1930s and present-day scenes in each country’s capital city. Looming large in all this is the complex figure of early modernist author Yi Sang, enfant terrible of the nascent avant-garde scene of the 1930s, when Korea was under Japanese colonial rule. Yi’s presence here can be traced to his 1932 poem ‘au magasin de nouveautes’, which serves as an index of visual motifs for the videowork. The poem is composed as a linguistic collage that contains montages of grotesque modernity and capitalist spectacle as experienced by the author during his visits to the recently built Mitsukoshi department store in downtown Seoul. In Jun’s video, the iconic form of the Graf Zeppelin serves a similar purpose, recalling its circumnavigation of the globe in 1929, when it became an instant sensation in Tokyo en route to transiting the Pacific Ocean. Symbolising the overwhelming dominance of Western technology and the shortening of the perceived distance between opposite sides of the planet, the Graf Zeppelin is an apt archetype manifesting the modernist attributes of mechanisation, mobility and multiple perspectives at the heart of Despair to be reborn. Published to coincide with Jun’s exhibition is an ambitious and wide-ranging editorial project that presents diverse writings by 11 international contributors from various fields – including science, mathematics, music, film, architecture and literature – who reflect on Yi’s legacy and the historical context that gave rise to his radical vision. Jun’s own contribution to this volume emulates Yi’s surrealist propensity to subvert literary conventions, resulting in a work of experimental fiction that operates as a set of footnotes to Despair to be reborn. Less germane to the exhibition’s theme are supplementary sculptures from Jun’s Organ series (2020), a new body of work consisting of amorphous illuminated masses of translucent melted plastics. While aesthetically intriguing, their primary function seems to be as lighting elements in the otherwise darkened gallery, and they never quite succeed in asserting themselves as integrated additions to the self-contained universe of Jun’s video and publishing work. Notwithstanding, Au Magasin de Nouveautés triumphs in linking radical sensibilities that define generations separated by decades and distance, channelling Yi’s voice to engage modern perceptions of place critically. Jun Sojung: Au Magasin de Nouveautés at Atelier Hermès, Seoul, 8 May – 5 July
ArtReview℗Can Music Save Museums?℗Aida Amoako℗Opinion℗31/07/2020℗‘Electronic: From Kraftwerk to the Chemical Brothers’ at London’s Design Museum offers some clues as to the fate of the ‘blockbuster exhibition’ in post-pandemic times℗A piece of wall text inside the Design Museum’s newly opened exhibition Electronic: From Kraftwerk to the Chemical Brothers asks: ‘Can a sound without words say anything?’ The show answers with a resounding ‘yes’ by way of an engaging exploration of electronic music’s evolution and enduring cultural influence. But the question also evokes the challenges of exhibiting popular music in the museum space. In his 2011 book Retromania, cultural critic Simon Reynolds wrote ‘I’m not sure music of any kind really works in a museum…’ His criticism stemmed from his belief that the museum’s ‘decorum’ was antithetical to popular music’s energies and that, unable to provide an authentic listening experience, music exhibitions relied on the ‘ancillary’ stuff: the instruments and ephemera. Electronic does place these on display. You can see the Roland TB-303 and French composer and producer Jean-Michel Jarre’s laser harp. But to their credit, the curators were not content to let these objects stand merely as artefacts from the recent past but as works of art in themselves. For example, Jarre’s Imaginary Studio allows the visitor to imagine the process of creation more easily than if the sheet music, books and instruments were simply lined up. Music exhibitions have evolved since Reynolds’s disappointing encounter with the British Music Experience. Sound is still for the most part complementary. The main curatorial approach remains telling the story of music’s past, present and possible future through its visual and material culture. But interactivity, which plays a bigger part in music exhibitions than in their visual arts counterparts, might be under threat with COVID-19. When art museums closed, exhibitions were either moved online, often in the form of curator-narrated video tours or postponed. But now that cultural institutions are cautiously reopening, directors must consider questions for which only time will bring answers: can they reassure the public that museums are safe to visit? How will blockbuster exhibitions accustomed to heavy footfall manage with reduced capacity, in order to comply with social distancing? What do people even want from art in the wake of a pandemic? A recent US study revealed that for many respondents, with a vaccine as yet unavailable, it would take increased cleaning, reduced admissions and mandatory masks to get them to attend museums in person again. And when they do return, most respondents want ‘more fun’ and ‘distraction and escape’. Electronic offers some clues as to how the ‘blockbuster exhibition’ – no longer able to draw in blockbuster crowds to generate hype – might function in a post-pandemic future. Masks are mandatory, capacity is reduced, regular ‘cleaning slots’ are scheduled, there are no touchscreens and you must bring your own headphones or reserve a pair. The lack of touchscreens removes an aspect of interactivity that music exhibitions often rely on to ‘engage’ visitors. But one COVID-19 safety measure inadvertently provided an unexpected source of interactivity and authenticity: plugging my headphones into the LCD screens recalled a more personal, intimate experience of listening to music and watching films. Electronic constantly anticipates the difficulty of immersing oneself and forgetting about COVID-19 when the experience itself is dictated by the pandemic. In a corny but self-aware response, it amalgamates the safety measures into the show. ‘KEEP THE DIST-DANCE’ is printed on the floors. Booths dedicated to Detroit, New York, Chicago, Berlin – cities that pioneered sub-genres such as House and Techno and grew underground scenes that preserved the culture – are labelled ‘Capacity: One’. While these days, you never slough off COVID-19-related paranoia entirely, there are moments where near total (but temporary) immersion occurs. Nøtel (2015), artist Lawrence Lek’s audio-visual collaboration with Kode9 drops the viewer into a virtual reality advert for an eerie, futuristic ‘hyper-luxury’ hotel without the need for a VR headset. But if this sounds solitary and antithetical to the communal spirit of raves, the culminating exhibit by Marcus Lyall and Adam Smith, The Chemical Brothers’s show designers, gets delightfully close to providing a live show experience. The smoky, incense-filled room featuring the concert visuals for The Chemical Brothers’s track ‘Got to Keep On’ (2019) and intense strobe lighting, gives visitors permission to lose themselves, if only for a moment. It’s a winking acknowledgement of the surreality of these times.
ArtReview℗Yokohama Triennale 2020 ‘Afterglow’ Review: Must the Show Go On?℗Taro Nettleton℗Reviews℗29/07/2020℗The curators say they want to cultivate discourses of justice, but the political infrastructure is precisely what’s left out of discussion℗One can look almost anywhere – from the rise of femicide in Turkey, the murder of Black people by police and of trans people in America and China’s crackdown on Hong Kong, to the fortification of national borders and the fact that climate change is turning more and more of the global south into a living hell – to see that these are degenerate times.   Yet these are also transformative times. We’re seeing changes being made as a result of the largest antiracist movement in history. Ordinary people have appropriated the internet as a political tool to fight for diversity, equity, inclusivity and justice. In this context, Yokohama Triennale 2020 should be celebrated. It brings, for the first time, a non-Japanese artistic director, Raqs Media Collective, which comprises three artists based in New Delhi, who have selected 67 artists (individuals and groups) from around the world to make work in three physical venues and on one virtual platform. More than half are showing in Japan for the first time. Unfortunately, the Yokohama Triennale 2020 also feels out of joint. The title and theme of the show is Afterglow. The exhibition’s key idea is framed as ‘luminosity’, which stands in the curatorial framework alongside terms like ‘autodidact’, ‘care’, ‘friendship’ and ‘toxicity’. The metaphor of radiance is inspired by corals that glow to warn of ultraviolet irradiation and the fact that television static is, in part, transmitting the afterglow of the Big Bang. As Charles and Ray Eames’s 1977 film, Powers of Ten, demonstrates, thinking at different scales, ranging from the micro to the macro, can be electrifying. There is a risk, however, of mystifying and naturalising micro issues such as nuclear power or the status of television as a medium by considering them at a cosmic scale. It’s well known that when Philo Farnsworth first demonstrated his invention – the television set – to the press in 1928, he transmitted a dollar sign. Much of the voting public in Japan are elderly television watchers, and Tokyo governor Yuriko Koike, a nationalist and xenophobic revisionist, successfully manipulated the medium in the recent election to shut out any opposing voices. Aren’t these stories more telling than the cosmic late-night stoner tale of Big Bang transmissions that fascinates the curators? Renuka Rajiv’s papier-mâchés, monoprints and fabric pieces, which combine playful, almost childlike imagery with idiosyncratic sentiments, and humorously and movingly articulate intersections of the psychosexual and sociopolitical, demonstrate that neither an appeal to the cosmic nor the sacrifice of the local is necessary for broader communication. The text in one work reads, ‘VIVID LIKE A COVID DREAM’ and ‘HOPE THINGS NEVER GO BACK TO NORMAL’, showing that micro-personal expressions can resonate effectively within a broader social context. Raqs Media Collective claims that this Yokohama Triennale is site-specific. Here’s a local context for understanding Yokohama Triennale 2020: despite a record-breaking surge in COVID-19 infections, Japan’s Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism moved up the launch of its ‘Go To’ tourism campaign, which will subsidise domestic travellers, to a week after the opening of the Yokohama Triennale. The cost of this campaign is ¥1.6 trillion, more than double what the government has spent on COVID-19 infection-prevention measures and establishing a medical system to deal with the pandemic.    In the context of its site, the opening of Yokohama Triennale, a state- and media-organised exhibition (involving the City of Yokohama, Japan’s national broadcaster NHK and national newspaper Asahi Shimbun), functions as part of a larger national programme of deceit and normalisation that also comprises the ‘Go To’ campaign and 2020 Olympic Games, which had been scheduled to open a week after the Triennale. The curators say they want to cultivate discourses of justice, but the political infrastructure is precisely what’s left out of discussion. How then can we understand this exhibition as anything but a tone-deaf spectacle? Watching multiple masked and uniformed museum staff standing in the searing sun through the cool, blue glass walls of the second site Plot 48, a repurposed recreational facility for children, I am transported to the eerie world of Todd Haynes’s 1995 film, Safe. Hygiene is apparently maintained with strict discipline in the exhibition, but something isn’t right. Yes, temperatures are taken at the door. Yes, a neatly dressed white-haired man sanitises the railing while I walk down the stairs. But who’d feel safe spending hours in a series of black rooms watching all the exhibited videos right now? A pesky elephant lingers in every dark room illuminated by a screen: must the show go on? There was also a Yokohama Triennale in 2011, after 11 March, after another invisible and manmade disaster – nuclear radiation caused by the meltdown of TEPCO’s Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. As a part of that exhibition, the Japanese artist Shimabuku made Stop and Think (2011), a remote installation of a sign with the titular message, a message of which the current Yokohama Triennale organisers might have taken heed.    Many of the exhibited works are of interest and should be experienced. At one point I am delightfully surprised watching and taking respite in Sarker Protick’s blissed-out ambient sound-video piece when admonishing calls to “stop slouching!” “be quiet!” “don’t eat so much!” and “chin up!” dissonantly emanate from Taus Makhacheva’s installation of strange gymnastics equipment. Single-channel videoworks, of which there are many, could easily be delivered online, however. Iiyama Yuki’s OLD LONG STAY (2020) is an important political work in the classic, edifying sense. It admirably, if very conventionally, tackles the complicated intersections of ableism and nationalism by shedding light on the grassroots struggle of lifelong Japanese residents of Korean nationality with disabilities to receive pensions. Properly disseminated, works like this may convey to the Japanese public that institutionalised prejudice is not a problem that exists exclusively in faraway lands. Zheng Bo’s very queer and relatively short video Pteridophilia I-IV (2016–19) is more experimental in its treatment of sex. Sex can create new intensities, new pleasures and new linkages. By contiguity, the projected images of young naked men in a lush forest making out with ferns turns the gallery space into a potential cruising spot. As a public experience, watching Pteridophilia and being turned on presents a real opportunity to form new relations with strangers. This potentiality, under-addressed in dominant art-discourse but long recognised by queer users of cinema houses, shifts the masked condition of our new reality from one that restricts affective communication to the enabling, lustful freedom of anonymity.          There’s also something wonderfully dislocating about entering the dilapidated room that houses Farah Al Qasimi’s Jazira Al Hamra (2020), named after a haunted ghost-town in the UAE, and made of cheaply outputted and deliberately kitsch colour photographs directly adhered to the walls and a window, addressing jinn possession and its exorcism in the contemporary postinternet world. I must have sensed a gaze when I looked up at the ceiling and found an image of a green ectoplasmic radiating evil eye (think Raiden from Mortal Kombat) coupled with the words ‘Ruqyah to Remove Black Magic’. Clearly, mysteries and spiritualisms survive, as they should, in this increasingly rationalised and unempathetic world. Let us not, however, fall into the trap of drawing cosmic conclusions from historical circumstances that affect the personal and the political, only to write them off as a result of stars aligning.     Yokohama Triennale 2020 ‘Afterglow’ runs until 11 October 2020.
ArtReview℗Delusions of the West: on Pankaj Mishra’s ‘Bland Fanatics’℗Mark Rappolt℗Book Review℗28/07/2020℗A collection of essays considers the hustlers and ‘chumocrats’ that fill our public intellectual life, and the enduring language of imperialism℗It may have seemed otherwise at the time, but the populist xenophobic and isolationist movements that climaxed in Brexit and the election of Donald Trump didn’t explode out of nowhere. They were always already there. So Pankaj Mishra argues in his collection of essays, Bland Fanatics, written over the past decade, that traces ‘Anglo-American delusions’ from the age of empire, via the Cold War, to neoliberalism and our embattled present. And argues that they are consistently the same. In this, the fanatics are us (Anglo-Americans), not them (variously, Muslims, minorities and the nationals of formally colonised countries). ‘The British political class has offered to the world an astounding spectacle of mendacious, intellectually limited hustlers,’ he argues in a 2017 essay on Brexit titled ‘Bumbling Chumocrats’. Before getting stuck into the public intellectuals and media organs who, actively or passively, have allowed the chummy bumblers (and their American equivalents), armed with their baggy ideas and exceptionalist ideologies, to get to where they are now. Niall Ferguson, Salman Rushdie, Jordan Peterson, The Economist, Financial Times, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and The Atlantic are just a few of the targets of Mishra’s damning deconstructions of the perversions of the West. Among those are capitalism, ‘Anglobalisation’, white supremacy, institutionalised poverty and the problematics faced by ‘the very few writers from formerly colonised countries or historically disadvantaged minorities in the West who are embraced by “legacy” periodicals’. Much of Mishra’s work, in both article and book form, has sought to trace the ways in which ideas affect realities. Bland Fanatics – its title borrowed from a term concocted by the American theologian and public intellectual Reinhold Niebuhr (an influence on Barack Obama, among many others) – is a continuation of this project, with an additional focus on the ways in which ideas can also be deployed to obscure reality. Mishra traces his awakening to this last to his native India, where the idea of constructing the world’s largest democracy was used to mask the deployment of martial law, state-sanctioned massacre and rape (the things from which India had apparently liberated itself in 1947), most evidently in Kashmir, which the author visited and reported from (for The Hindu) at the end of the last century. ‘India’s own bland fanatics, who seemed determined to nail their cherished “idea of India” into Kashmiri hearts and minds, prepared me for the spectacle of a liberal intelligentsia cheerleading the war for “human rights” in Iraq, with the kind of humanitarian rhetoric about freedom, democracy and progress that was originally heard from European imperialists in the nineteenth century,’ he writes in his introduction, as he prepares us for the autopsy that’s about to commence. Accordingly, though perhaps a little disappointingly, only one of the essays collected here directly tackles the country of his birth, a 2012 review of New Yorker staff writer Katherine Boo’s Behind the Beautiful Forevers, which tells the tale of a garbage trader in Mumbai. The collection begins with Mishra’s infamous 2011 evisceration of historian Niall Ferguson and his book Civilisation: The West and the Rest (following which Ferguson threatened to sue for libel over allegations of racism). It remains a dazzling display of what close analysis and precise polemic can achieve. While also setting the stage for some of this collection’s persistent themes: how the language of imperialism remains the language that is deployed by both left and right today, and how Asian and other voices are erased from or suppressed within global political discourse as it is reported in liberal as well as illiberal discussion in the West. ‘Sane thinking’, he writes in relation to the first in a 2017 article titled ‘The Religion of Whiteness’, ‘would require, at the very least, an examination of the history – and stubborn persistence – of racist imperialism.’ By the time you get to that line, of course, you already know that this collection is beginning to do just that. In relation to the second of those themes, Mishra leaves a lengthy trail of breadcrumbs that includes, among others, the Indonesian intellectual Soedjatmoko, Indian-born novelist Kamala Markandaya, grand mufti of Egypt Muhammad Abduh, Indian reformist B. R. Ambedkar, Muslim activist Jamal al-Din al-Afghani and Chinese intellectual Liang Qichao (these last two the foundations of Mishra’s 2012 book From the Ruins of Empire). Indeed, the full list can seem so comprehensive that you wonder when Mishra has time to write. Along the way, however, there’s a sense that Mishra’s carefully crafted pose of the Indian writer unmasking Anglo-American delusions about global power and national progress from the point of view of an outsider (perhaps even a victim) has, alongside his success (most recently with 2017’s The Age of Anger) and his considerable investment in the detail of these delusions, become somewhat difficult to maintain. This comes particularly to the fore in a 2018 review of Ta-Nehisi Coates’s 2017 essay collection We Were Eight Years in Power (although, as others have pointed out, Mishra doesn’t really review individual publications so much as their authors’ entire careers) titled ‘Why Do White People Like What I Write?’. In part, the text attempts to parse how liberal commentators could embrace the use of torture and bombing as part of various ‘wars on terror’, while simultaneously supporting Coates’s project to deconstruct and acknowledge ‘the historical legacy of institutionalised racial cruelty, inequality and division’ in the US. To embrace one sin (brutal imperialism), while recognising another (slavery), as if the two things were not ideologically and practically linked. While Mishra concedes that ‘amid this hectic laundering of reputations, and a turnover of “woke” white men, Coates has seized the opportunity to describe American power from the rare standpoint of its victims’, he also points out that the American writer is particularly vulnerable to the charge that he ‘is popular among white liberals since he assuages their guilt about racism’. And has a dig at Coates (a writer he evidently, if somewhat begrudgingly, admires) for describing The Atlantic (for which the essays included in We Were Eight Years in Power were originally written) as ‘prestigious’. In the wake of the murder of George Floyd and the subsequent Black Lives Matter protests in the US and the UK, Mishra’s essay on Niall Ferguson was redeployed in a newsletter sent out by London Review of Books. He also writes for, among other publications, The Guardian, Bloomberg and The New York Times. All of which leads one to think that at least some of what Mishra has to say about Coates might be the result of a degree of self-reflection on the dangers he faces himself. And yet this collection does a whole lot more than simply kick against the pricks. It’s an extraordinarly powerful argument, by a writer of powerful and perhaps even remorseless conviction, for the case that we need first to rethink our past in order to reshape our future. And never more so than in times of present stress.
ArtReview℗The Quiet Resistance in Gordon Parks’s Photographs of Black America℗Mark Rappolt℗Reviews℗23/07/2020℗The pioneering photographer’s documentation of discrimination, violence and a system that forced compliance, presages today’s prison industrial complex℗There’s no doubt that the exhibition of photographs by Gordon Parks documenting segregation in 1950s Alabama and the US Black Muslim movement of the early 1960s at Alison Jacques Gallery in London’s genteel Fitzrovia has taken on added relevance in the context of the recent Black Lives Matter protests and the self-isolation (which at times seems like it might slip into various forms of segregation) imposed in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. The exhibition is an absolute gimme for an art critic (or gallery) wishing to assert their awareness of societal struggles surrounding race, inequality and the systemic suppression of peoples considered other. This past weekend The Sunday Times art critic Waldemar Januszczak dutifully (if clumsily) opened up his review of the show by remarking that he could feel ‘a powerful wind blowing across the land’. ‘It could be the wind of change…’ he continued, presumably channelling memories of rocking to The Scorpions and the events of 1989. ‘What it certainly is is the wind of pertinence,’ he went on, starting to row back, to hedge his bets, before noting that ‘the most important and best art being made right now is being made by black artists’ (no further details given) and that it had been an effort not to ‘blub’ once he had encountered Parks’s works. Parks, who died in 2006, was a photographer, writer, musician and filmmaker. The first African American to direct a major Hollywood movie (The Learning Tree, 1969, which was based on his own novel, from 1963), he went on to inspire a new genre (blaxploitation) with the release of Shaft in 1971. He first rose to prominence, however, as a photographer, originally working for the Farm Security Administration photography project, based in Washington, DC. The photographs on show in London were commissioned as stories for Life magazine: Segregation in the South in 1956 and Black Muslims in 1963. Despite Januszczak’s highly attuned sensitivity to shifts in the weather, they were as ‘pertinent’ then, if not more so, when they described the lived reality of their subjects. There’s no doubt that part of the point of Parks’s colour photographs of the segregated South and black-and-white portraits of Malcolm X was to document and assist the whipping up of a wind. Simultaneously with the exhibition, Steidl has published The Atmosphere of Crime, 1957, documenting another of Parks’s series for Life (the photographs themselves are now in the permanent collection of the Museum of Modern Art, New York). Parks was the first African American to hold the position of staff photographer (from 1948 to 1972) at the influential weekly magazine. The book documents his contribution to the 9 September 1957 edition of the magazine, titled ‘Crime in the U.S.’, featuring first the photographs themselves and then reproductions of the pages on which they originally appeared. The cover illustration, ‘A New York Street Gang’, looks like a scene from West Side Story (the first Broadway production of which opened later that month), suggesting the feature’s status as standing somewhere between reporting and entertainment. ‘On the surface, the world of crime is much like the world of honest men…,’ the Chandleresque text that introduces Parks’s contribution begins. ‘But underneath, this world has its own dark atmosphere.’ Sandwiched among adverts for Haggar Slacks, Bayer Aspirin, Metropolitan Life Insurance, Band-Aid plastic plasters, Gleem toothpaste, Fitch dandruff remover shampoo and Ford’s Edsel automobiles, there’s a sense of the feature titillatingly lifting the curtain on a life that Life’s largely white, middle-class, urban and suburban readers do not know. It’s no great stretch to imagine that a white-cube commercial art gallery opposite a posh hotel in gentrified London offers a similar audience a similar service today. Though it is also good, of course, that Parks’s work is being seen – this is the first solo exhibition of his work in the British capital in 25 years. Back in the book, a blurry nighttime shot of a group of men hanging out on a street corner is captioned, ‘A furtive poker game whiles away a hot summer night on a tough sidewalk in New York. The beat cop has just passed, and the youths have time for a few more hands before he returns to break up the illegal game.’ Given that it’s hard to tell what exactly is going on, Parks’s image gently suggests a conflation of suspiciousness and crime, boredom and crime, a lack of places to go and crime. There are images of the aftermath of crimes – people being taken into ambulances, rooms being searched, but no images of crimes themselves (albeit the images not used by Life include a sequence showing a man shooting up – his arms at the moment of injection neatly mirroring other images of men’s arms in handcuffs). Taken on their own, Parks’s photographs document a world of poverty, drug addiction and violence, the last being more apparent in images of cops gleefully kicking down doors and brandishing revolvers than in any ‘criminal’ acts. ‘Guns drawn, Chicago detectives break in the door of a suspicious room. Surprise means safety. A quick kick follows a perfunctory knock,’ reads the caption (presumably written by reporter Henry Suydam, who worked with Parks on the assignment) that accompanies one of the photographer’s more dramatic images. When they’re not breaking in, the cops in Parks’s images are booking in criminals, doing paperwork, hanging around and looking out for suspicious rooms and people. Policework, as Parks records it, is a matter of bureaucracy, a symptom of a system. The Life feature ends with a shot of prisoners going into lockdown in San Quentin, a burly guard dominating the foreground. According to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), a shocking one in every three Black males born today in the US can expect, at some point, to join the prison population, which has itself increased by over 700 percent since 1970. (The figures for Latino males are one in every six, and for whites, one in every 17.) These days US prisons are part of an $80-billion industry, with the prison phone industry alone raking in $1.2b of that. There are even dedicated prison trade fairs. It is, as Roger Ross Williams’s 2018 documentary Jailed in America (more pointedly titled American Jail for those of you looking it up in the US) argues, an industry that has become too big to fail. It’s an industry that, in nascent form, Parks seems to have identified in The Atmosphere of Crime (a subject further explored in essays by Nicole R. Fleetwood, Sarah Hermanson Meister and Bryan Stevenson in the Steidl publication). Like Parks, Williams is something of a pioneer, being the first African-American director to win an Academy Award (for Music for Prudence, 2009, best documentary short). In a sense, Jailed in America feels like an extension of the sensibilities and some of the methods that Parks deployed in his own work, documenting personal stories (in this case the imprisonment and subsequent suicide of one of Williams’s childhood friends) and the expansive bureaucratic system that leads young African Americans to jail and then keeps them there as the levers of power are used to grease the cogs of an industry that in turn supports those invested in maintaining their power. That discrimination and violence are woven into the fabric of US society is something that Parks’s photographs of Black life in the South amply demonstrate. As with The Atmosphere of Crime, his Alabama photographs document scenes that are apparently ordinary and everyday: people sitting on porches, people talking to neighbours, people buying ice cream. Yet the bodies are Black, the houses are rundown and the ice-cream shoppers are standing at the ‘Colored’ window or drinking from the ‘Colored Only’ water fountain. What’s remarkable is the dignity apparent in the three families Parks shot. The fact that they seem to be getting on with their lives despite the restrictions on how they are permitted to do that. A form of quiet resistance that seems all the more obvious when paired with the photographs from the Black Muslims series, which in itself attempts to record its subjects as a community as much as a movement or an existential threat to the US. What seems most remarkable now is that anyone put up with the shit that Parks recorded in Alabama. But flick back to The Atmosphere of Crime or open a newspaper today and you better understand the system that forced this compliance. And continues, in various less visible forms, to do the same today.
ArtReview℗The Rebirth of the Suburb?℗Chris Fite-Wassilak℗Book Review℗20/07/2020℗A new book on urban sprawl drops just in time for those fleeing city centres℗The city has apparently ‘lost its appeal’ during lockdown. No space; too many people. Those who can afford it are looking to get out, many of them to that place of supposed refuge – the suburb. For those wondering precisely where to move, Jason Diamond’s The Sprawl, a conversational, at times personal, cultural history of the US suburbs, promises to be of help. Consider it a Sightseeing Tour of American Suburbia and its Famous Homes: highlights include the modernist Ben Rose House in Highland Park, Illinois, famous for its appearance in Ferris Bueller’s Day Off (1986); the quaint town of Seaside, Florida, that provided the basis for the domed TV set of The Truman Show (1998); Bay City, Michigan, the quiet, neglected hometown of Madonna Louise Ciccone; or an unremarkable house in Lodi, New Jersey, where Misfits’ singer Glenn Danzig grew up. But beyond the famous, over half of the nation’s population already lives in what qualify as suburbs and so, as the author asserts, we are ‘still very much in the middle of the suburban century’. This is not just about pandemic property speculation. The wider questions of where culture comes from and what stories we pay attention to are among the most important of our time: looking beyond the noise and jostling of the city is a necessary part of that. While other recent publications – such as Amanda Kolson Hurley’s Radical Suburbs (2019) and Marcia Chatelain’s Franchise: The Golden Arches in Black America (2020) – have cast new light on the set view of the suburbs as trapped, stale and pale, The Sprawl, itself a sprawling overview, seems happy to affirm the stereotype of suburbia as a place of anxiety, boredom and alienation. Setting itself primarily among the enclaves of the ‘Chicagoland’ area in which the author, now a journalist, grew up, the book is useful as a primer on some of the policies and politics that shaped the American ’burbs. Diamond charts the origins of several suburbs, among them Zion and McHenry in Illinois, that all share the same fate: pastoral utopias designed to be an escape from the industrial grit of the city that soon became trapped within their own picket fences. William Levitt, one property developer he explores in detail, set up a series of planned towns across the US from the 1940s onwards, all of which had active policies to ensure that buyers would be Caucasians only. Levitt, a Jew who claimed not to be racist, blamed his customers for the policy, describing it as ‘their attitude, not ours’. Diamond is keen to stress the tensions and shifting diversity of the suburbs, but his book never moves far beyond long-established (white) portrayals: the films of John Hughes (a biography of who Diamond has previously written), the stories of John Cheever, the static images of the suburb in Blue Velvet (1986), The Virgin Suicides (1999), Back to the Future (1985). There are interesting asides – like Mr. T getting into a landscaping dispute with his neighbours in the 1980s after felling a few oak trees that he claimed triggered his allergies; or how Leave it to Beaver (1957–63), The Munsters (1964–66), The ’Burbs (1989) and Desperate Housewives (2004–12) were all shot on the same Hollywood set – but their wider cultural and racial implications are never really followed up. While Diamond gestures to the limits of constantly showing the suburbs as a place of homogeneity and stagnation, he doesn’t move beyond them. Perhaps this book’s most insightful contribution, whether intentional or not, is the way in which it embodies a suburban mindset: Diamond’s first points of reference and main focus are on wellknown films, music, books – pop stuff made in places other than the suburbs. At one point he likens the latter to Anakin Skywalker: full of potential, but also with a dark side. It is only once the author reveals a bit of himself – a practically homeless teenager drifting between separated parents – that this project achieves a greater resonance. His previous posturing – hiding behind a ream of cultural references – is part of the suburban mask that Diamond seems reluctant to investigate. ‘It felt so surreal, like something out of a movie,’ he writes of a ‘McMansion’ his father has settled into. ‘But so did everything else, really,’ he shrugs, not examining any further that peculiar aspect of the snake eating its own tail.
ArtReview℗The Death of Leisure: Tulapop Saenjaroen’s ‘People on Sunday’℗Max Crosbie-Jones℗Reviews℗19/06/2020℗The Thai artist updates the pioneering 1930 German silent film for our hypercompetitive, productivity-fetishising times℗‘Leisure,’ wrote German philosopher Josef Pieper, is not the attitude of ‘someone who seizes but of one who lets go, who lets himself go, and “go under”, almost as someone who falls asleep must let himself go.’ In the serene opening section of Tulapop Saenjaroen’s trifurcated videowork, someone tries to ‘go under’ but fails. Birds chirp and cicadas drone as a young woman lies on a sun-dappled forest floor, one arm artfully arranged above her head. She is framed in meticulous repose, her body still, yet her eyes – refusing to sit still – tell us she is struggling to relax. The full minute that the camera lingers on this painterly scene is a chore, not a reverie. And there’s more wooden am-dram where that came from. Soon she and three friends are sitting beside a stream in a Thai national park, randomly repeating hackneyed life-hacks between themselves: “Spend time with people important to you”; “Improve your abilities and knowledge”; “Set your weekly goals for future success”. This offbeat scene is followed by behind-the-scenes footage and a voiceover in which the actress explains that she feels “positive about” this “little vacation”-cum-film shoot, mainly because it is a chance to make “connections that might be useful in the future”. The central conceit here – a reinterpretation, a response and a homage to Robert Siodmak and Edgar G. Ulmer’s pioneering silent film Menschen Am Sonntag (1930) – is very on the nose. In the original, the nonactors, a group of ordinary Berliners playing themselves, fritter and frolic away their weekend in parks and streets with libertine abandon and unselfconscious naturalism. By contrast, the mechanical performances in this making of a remake are a clear sendup of workaholism in these hypercompetitive, productivity-fetishising times of ours. While the Berliners of the 1930s knew how to play at being at leisure in the wholly uncommodified and unmediated sense that Pieper so eloquently wrote about, Saenjaroen’s compulsively busy Bangkokians are too far gone. Real, replenishing downtime is so alien to these gig-economy workers that, for them to pass as the titular people on Sunday, they need to be manhandled like props, given stock phrases or plonked in front of colour meditation videos. As with A Room with a Coconut View (2018), his Thai Short Film and Video Festival-winning sideswipe at the Kingdom’s tourist marketing-machine, Saenjaroen’s episodic structure, mordant caricatures and formal quirks – lurid visuals, jaunty Muzak, warbling sound effects – keep us in thrall and onside. Another segment features the inner ramblings of a scopophobic cameraman on behind-the-scenes duties. As the crew refuels and rests, he explains (in a disguised voice à la gangland documentary) how his fear of being watched has left him in a transactional work relationship with his own self. Later, a world-weary freelance graphic artist explains how she likes to soak up random imagery in spare moments. She sits there in a Korean facemask, clutching a cuddly toy, worrying that “everything will drain out” if she ever stops gazing. It transpires, finally, that she gives online tutorials in editing meditation videos – this solitary figure so estranged from leisure is, paradoxically, a paid-up member of the leisure industry. People on Sunday possesses none of the elusive or oneiric qualities for which Thai video artists have become best known. But beneath that cheeky and restless veneer lurk intriguing depths: Saenjaroen loosely sketches the dangers of not habitually reappraising our relationship with free time as we submit to the chase of extreme careerism. Squeezing the weekends-only online screening of it into my work-from-home schedule of recent weeks left me reflecting on my own hit-and-miss attempts to ‘go under’ – and grinning. If ‘work-life balance’ is, as poet-philosopher David Whyte has written, a ‘phrase that often becomes a lash with which we punish ourselves’, then Saenjaroen has succeeded at comically amplifying the painful thwacking sound.
ArtReview℗‘Postracialism Was a Reactionary Fantasy’: Touré F. Reed’s Case Against Race Reductionism℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Book Review℗03/06/2020℗Toward Freedom explains how our understanding of racial disparities became abstracted from the political-economic forces that generate them℗US Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden recently attracted criticism when he exclaimed at the end of an interview on US radio show The Breakfast Club, “If you have a problem figuring out if you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t black”. Host Charlamagne tha God shot back, “It don’t have nothing to do with Trump, it has to do with the fact – I want something for my community”. However spontaneous and unplanned, the exchange typifies much of the way race, politics and economics is understood and lived in the US (and elsewhere). Arguments over the nature and causes of racial inequality are now often violently polarised, and ethnic and racial identity has become a cultural and political fault line. Concepts of white supremacy, white privilege and systemic and institutional racism have become popular in understanding why black and brown people continue to lose out against white peers, in income, employment, housing and social mobility. And as identarian views of social divisions have become more popular, what Touré F. Reed refers to as political economy – the analysis of social divisions based in the relations of working people to capital – has moved to the fringes of leftwing and progressive politics. It’s encouraging, then, to read Reed’s lucid historical analysis of the evolution of US class and race politics, from the New Deal era of the 1930s and 40s, through the civil rights years of the 50s and 60s, to the neoconservative reaction of Reaganomics in the 80s and the present era of neoliberalism – a period overseen by Democratic administrations as much as Republican ones. Reed agrees that Democrats – from Kennedy to Obama – ‘have unquestionably failed to address the structural sources of racial disparities’. But rather than conclude – as more pessimistic post-Obama progressives such as the influential commentator Ta-Nehisi Coates have done – that economic redistribution policies simply failed to engage with the entrenched power of ‘systemic racism’, Reed argues that Democrats have often gone along with accepting neoliberal economic tenets, while tending ‘to abstract racial disparities from the political-economic forces that generate them’. Toward Freedom is an intricate account of the conservative drift in liberal thinking and policy from the Great Depression to the current moment. Throughout, Reed examines how antiracist demands were continuously isolated from broader demands for economic reforms that would coalesce the interests of working-class Americans to endanger capital. What Reed finds is that the evolution of identitarian notions of ethnic group-identity has become the way political representation is understood, even while, as he bleakly observes, deindustrialisation and its neoliberal aftermath have destroyed wages and narrowed opportunities for working-class and middle-class Americans, regardless of race. Reed is scathing when it comes to the ‘postracial’ agenda of America’s first black president. ‘At its core,’ he writes, ‘postracialism was a reactionary fantasy. President Obama… presumed that since the victories of the modern civil rights movement had swept aside the formal racial impediments to black equality, lingering inequality had less to do with extant prejudice than slow economic growth, racism’s historic legacy and, crucially, the cultural deficiencies of poor African Americans themselves.’ As Reed notes, ‘Obama’s presidency would exert little positive influence over racial disparities.’ But, notably, Reed also takes issue with Coates, one of the most prominent critics of postracialism, who in recent years has been at the forefront of the demand for a specifically race-oriented economic policy of reparations. Reed sees Obama’s quiescent acceptance of the neoliberal economic status quo, and Coates’s ‘conceptualization of racism as the engine of history’, as two sides of the same failure of political thinking on how economic divisions refract and reinforce racial ones – what Reed typifies as ‘race reductionism’.
ArtReview℗Carla Rippey’s Many Lives℗Gaby Cepeda℗Reviews℗01/06/2020℗An exhibition at Biquini Wax EPS, Mexico City, tells a story of the artist’s creative life seen through a feminist lens℗Carla Rippey has led many lives. She had already studied at La Sorbonne by the time she arrived, aged nineteen, at the SUNY Old Westbury, where she wrote a thesis on art and politics supervised by artist and critic Luis Camnitzer. A little later, in Boston, she learned printing at an alternative press, lived in a women’s commune and created silkscreened posters for feminist events. In 1972 she found herself a visiting student in Chile where she ran with the Revolutionary Left Movement and was beaten by military cops during the coup against Salvador Allende. She fled to Mexico City a year later and was involved in the Infrarrealismo movement with Roberto Bolaño – Catalina O’Hara from his novel The Savage Detectives (1998) is based on her – and with Peyote y la Compañía (Peyote and the Company), one of the many art groups formed during the politically engaged and collectively organised period of Los Grupos (The Groups), between 1977 and 1982. More recently, in 2013, she became the first woman to direct ‘La Esmeralda’, the influential national public art school, in Mexico City. Cosas que pasan (Things That Happen) exhibits the material remains of some of these lives, from a period between 1970 and 1990. The exhibition features facsimiles, scans of sketches, poems written on margins and casual snapshots hung with glittery scotch tape: a story of her creative life seen through a feminist lens, unassuming yet assured and well-crafted. Rippey often created by erasing: ¿Pienso con más esfuerzo o me esfuerzo por no pensar? (Am I Thinking Harder or Hardly Thinking?, 1978) and Thoughtless (1978) are both despintados (‘unpainteds’), works in which she delicately sandpapered the ink off magazine pages, leaving a pair of eyes to float on white nothingness over well-dressed shoulders and leather-gloved hands clenching the space where the head should be. She also made realistic drawings in graphite smoothed over with erasers, the lines blurry and pictorial. In her series of postcards Santas y Pecadoras (Saints and Sinners, 1973) she drew old-timey photos of women charged with prostitution, making them appear uncanny, dreamlike: a young woman sticking her tongue out next to a stiff military handshake, another looking angelic while sleeping in a trunk – hopefully not dead. Rippey’s archive is also intimate; on loose sheets of paper she writes beautifully of the emotions elicited by her partner (the artist Adolfo Patiño) and also of dissatisfaction and of feeling underappreciated (elsewhere she scratches off the face of someone who crossed her in a group photo). A highlight: A thick wooden frame holding a drawing by Rippey’s son, made on an etching press, with the words: ‘My mom makes prints because she likes art and so we can eat’.  Rippey was often the lone woman in the Mexico City art scenes she frequented, and her work is sometimes brought up as a side note to that of some of the male artists who surrounded her, like Patiño or Bolaño. This show is the first offering from the workshop-seminar Depatriarchalizing the Archives, hosted at Biquini Wax EPS, which seeks to rebalance art history through research and – refreshingly – nuance: how might one bring to light the realities of the skewed power balance in artistic-romantic partnerships, without minimising one character’s experience or demonising others? This show offers an answer by staying close to Rippey’s voice, to her truth, laid out in the affections and emotions of her memories.
ArtReview℗Eduardo Paolozzi’s ‘Health Warning for an Uncreative and Thriftless Society’℗Pádraic E. Moore℗Reviews℗28/05/2020℗An exhibition at Clearing, Brussels reveals the artist’s desire to dissect the rationalised psychopathy of Western civilisation℗Eduardo Paolozzi was ambivalent about being referred to as a Pop artist, though he is often described as one of the ‘founding fathers’ of the movement in Britain. Like his peer Richard Hamilton, he emerged from the cerebral interdisciplinary milieu of the Independent Group, which sought to analyse and influence the future of art, design and technology. Perhaps correctly, the Scottish artist felt his affiliations with Pop led to reductive interpretations of his work and obscured its roots in an ideological approach. This show, featuring sculptures, suites of prints and an early animation (dating from 1963 to 1975), testifies to the complexity and formal cohesion of Paolozzi’s output. Paolozzi once described his work as a ‘health warning for an uncreative and thriftless society’, and much here implies that the relationship between man and machine is irrevocably tipping in a doomed direction. Attesting to his sociological interest in the apparatuses of commodity fetishism, it also reveals his desire to dissect and diagnose the rationalised psychopathy of Western civilisation. The series of screenprints entitled Universal Electronic Vacuum (1967) engages all the classic visual tropes of psychedelia: Day-Glo grids, Ben-Day dots, shimmering rasterized tracery. Its horror vacui is overwhelming, an overabundance of optical stimuli squeezed into every available inch. A comparatively sombre print from this series, War Games Revised, stands out: a schema of missiles and thermonuclear bombs rendered in matt silver and navy. These projectile weapons are arranged to resemble the components of an injection-moulded scale-model kit. The familiar aesthetics of mass-made playthings fused with the advanced instruments of industrialised killing, made while the Vietnam War raged, recalls the agitprop photomontage of John Heartfield. Another suite of prints, Conditional Probability Machine (1970), consists of 25 black-and-white etchings of sober, barely altered images sourced mainly from scientific and military journals depicting an array of subjects such as irradiated mice, crash-test dummies and cyborgian automata: a study of the ways in which twentieth-century scientific and technological achievements were driving the human species towards more efficient forms of barbarism. Clearly, Paolozzi was deeply preoccupied with the psychological and physical impact of technology; yet while he may have had some inkling of a dystopian future, he never could have envisaged the techno-rational containment of our cybercapitalist twenty-first century. Paolozzi’s vision is positively rose-tinted when compared to the bleakness of our current situation, more Barbarella than Black Mirror. The show’s nucleus is a metallic citadel of mechanomorphic sculptures, amalgamations of mechanical miscellanea: household appliances, turbines, pistons and industrial tubing prefabricated in monochrome cast metal. Parrot (1964) appears like a priapic totem from some postapocalyptic world; Pan Am (1966), a welded modular construction, resembles the debris from a spacecraft that broke apart on reentry. Several of these were originally commissioned for a playground, reflecting the enthusiasm of those booming years in which factions of artists believed that art and architecture could be democratising, emancipatory agents for fomenting positive social change.  The show’s title is taken from an artist book, a manifesto-cum-monograph Paolozzi produced in 1964, its focus the changing dynamic between humans and machines. Yet from today’s vantage point the titular phrase might also be seen as referring to the way in which the utopian initiatives and progressive aims of the 1960s were moribund and ossified by the century’s end. Ultimately, The Metallization of a Dream constitutes the remnants of a once-vital avant-garde that, like Russian Constructivism, was unironically committed to an idealistic position. Instilled in these works from Paolozzi’s zenith are the imagined possibilities of a long-lost moment – assured exuberances all but absent from our plague-ridden present.
ArtReview℗Your Guide to Gallery Weekend Beijing℗Sylvia Xue Bai℗Reviews℗22/05/2020℗From Wang Jiajia at SPURS Gallery to ‘Meditations in an Emergency’ at UCCA, the best from BGW’s fourth edition℗UCCA’s first show of the year proves its ambition to be an institution at the forefront of connecting shared public experiences to contemporary art. Twenty-six artists of different generations and nationalities have been hand-picked by UCCA’s six curators who have sprung into action to curate this show in less than a month. The exhibition itself is formed of five sections that tackle various subissues that have arisen during this global public- and mental-health crisis. Due to shipping restrictions, contributions by international artists mostly come in the form of videoworks, offering a rare chance for us to meditate in the darkness with works such as Pierre Huyghe’s Untitled (Human Mask) (2014), in which an uncannily human monkey in a mask wanders in the restricted land of post-disaster Fukushima, questioning received distinctions between human and animal. Many works that appear here for the first time have a strangely beautiful (or sometimes painful) prophetic quality in today’s post-crisis situation. For example, Shanghai-born Amiko Li’s The Purpose of Disease (2020), a mix of photography, installation, and sculptures, charts his investigations into a treatment for a skin rash. Paintings by Han Bing and Zhang Hui also set the reflective tone of this rich and inviting exhibition. I walk in, only to discover many eyes staring at me in a knowingly-witty way. They are the protagonists in Wang Jiajia’s new body of paintings. “We were told as children that looking into someone’s eyes is good manners”, he says, and these works acknowledge my presence so pressingly that I almost feel a chill. Thirteen pairs of eyes hidden behind layers of oil and spray paint, acrylic and resin are reminiscent of the evil characters in cartoon visuals. But then the vibrant colour, the gestural strokes, the glossy finish, the appropriated digital text… yell ‘Pop’. But can ‘Pop’ make one feel the presence of evil, feel unsettled? In search of an answer, I simply stare back at these multiple eyes. But no one wins; we are literally just looking at each other. What’s worse, they seem to be ganging-up on me. Uneasy, a bit daunted, yet unmistakably attracted – these are my mixed emotions when confronted with Elegant, Circular, Timeless. Challenging and realising the impossible has been the DNA of this gallery since its birth in a former cinema in San Gimignano, Italy, 30 years ago. It has carried that very spirit with it since landing in Beijing’s 798 district in 2004. Back then the area was considered to be part of Beijing’s outskirts; nothing like the world-famous ‘art district’ it is today. The ongoing Fifteen Years of Galleria Continua in China celebration program started back in October 2019 – it presents key works by artists that have been significant for the Beijing space in its 15-year history, with new additions each month. During GWBJ, Daniel Buren starts the first of a series of monthly on-site interventions deploying his signature stripes and colours, both outside the gallery entrance and throughout the gallery space. Kader Attia and Hans Op De Beeck present a new videowork each month – and secretly I’m beginning to think that the increased circulation of masterpiece videoworks is one of the true silver-linings of this pandemic (thankfully digital files don’t have to be quarantined). I entered a hypnotic and deeply moving state in front of Hans Op De Beeck’s work Thread (2015) today – aren’t we all connected right now? However much the reverse might seem to be the case. Living in a megacity like Beijing, where crossing the street can take up to five minutes, makes one seriously question the scale of a single human body and what can be achieved with it. Ge Yulu is obsessed with critical thinking about the agency of the individual. And one work in particular has made him a well-known figure in China’s mass media: he manually put up a street sign reading Ge Yu Lu (lu means ‘street’ in Chinese) on the outskirts of Beijing; it went unnoticed. In this first solo exhibition he further engages his body and taps into one of the essentials of modern living – electricity, something we take for granted, especially when standing in a well-designed gallery space. Although that was not the case today, when I stepped inside at 11am. Because Ge Yulu was in the middle of riding a bicycle that converts his movement into electricity, to be stored in batteries. He started from his home on the outskirts of Beijing at 10am and will do so every day for the duration of the exhibition. The batteries then provide the electrical energy to power the show. When he arrived at 4pm, he literally lit up then show. Which itself contains digital clips of his previous works in the exhibition space, which often place his body in direct engagement with public urban life. The exhibition title reads forcefully both in English and Chinese. It sounds like the opening line of a manifesto. These three elements are critical to the thinking and dynamic oeuvre of Pu Yingwei, in paintings, videoworks, installation and non-fiction writing. There’s no doubt that the artist is preoccupied with identity- and geopolitics. His new series of monumental paintings reminds me of the ‘Political Pop’ that was once so instrumental in Chinese contemporary art yet has now lost traction. Pu Yingwei decisively layers Russian letters over English letters, mostly to spell out everyday words in French. The symbolic power of Russian Constructivists is still alive in our collective consciousness in China (just take a look at the slogans on Beijing billboards), which only serves to accentuate the violent clash of the imagery. Stamps and currency bills, no longer so visible these days, are brought back to life in his paintings. So are national flags. Another section of the exhibition presents what the artist describes as ‘my inner worlds’: from an older videowork showing him with his father, broken and destroyed painting frames from his previous shows to a more recent video featuring the artist learning to sing a Cantonese song (think Hong Kong in 2019). Pu Yingwei is a living example how being politically engaged is still possible for young artists in China today.
ArtReview℗Mercy Hospital: the Drawings of Ida Applebroog℗Tom Denman℗Reviews℗22/05/2020℗The artist’s works, exhibited at London’s Freud Museum, are fraught with psychological angst℗‘But nobody could climb through that pattern – it strangles so; I think that is why it has so many heads,’ says the narrator of Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s 1892 short story, ‘The Yellow Wall-Paper’. Text from Gilman’s story and passages from Sigmund Freud’s case studies and Franz Kafka’s Metamorphosis (1915) are included in the publication that accompanies the drawings by Ida Applebroog currently being exhibited at the Freud Museum. The American artist chose the texts herself, and we can understand why. The drawings – which she made in 1969–70 in San Diego’s Mercy Hospital, where, struck with severe depression, she interned herself for six weeks – are fraught with psychological angst, questioning what it is to be human. Of these texts, Gilman’s story bears the most direct resemblance to Applebroog’s drawings, not least for its protofeminist overtones, being about a woman’s domestic isolation as she undergoes a nervous breakdown (at the climax of which she identifies with a colony of imaginary women living within the wallpaper, trapped and trying to escape) and her subjection to her more ‘rational’ physician husband. Like Gilman’s wallpaper, the drawings are inhabited by amorphous, seemingly animate forms that hover between emergence and obscuration – you can’t tell if they’re coming or going. Scribbled in the bottom corner of one such drawing are the words this way… no that way… Come this way…. no that way… repeated over and over, aligned vertically and scrawling from the bottom of the sheet to about halfway up, continuing for ten lines until she runs out of room. The last four of these lines are compressed, crammed in; we are left with the impression that if it were not for the arbitrary border of the page, she’d have carried on repeating these words forever. To the left of this marginalia is a humanoid form jaggedly outlined in black pastel – and yet there is nothing really to signify that this is a human being or meant to be a figure at all, human, anthropomorphic, animal or otherwise. The ‘head’ is like the head of a turtle, but its ‘mouth’ could also be an estuary, just as the withered ‘breast’ could be a promontory or the ‘arm’ a peninsula. Then again, is it anything? Is it not just an abstraction? Like many of the ‘figures’ in the Mercy Hospital series, it plays on our own inclination to recognise the familiar in the strange. We automatically see a figure – I see a ragged old man with a walking stick, but there is nothing really to signify that this is what is being represented. Nor is there anything to say that the faint squiggle behind it is necessarily a tail, or an imaginary tail, or if in fact there are two figures overlapping, one the devilish alter ego of the other, and so on… In this sense, the drawings play on our own inherent madness. We are all like Gilman’s heroine to a certain degree, we all see ourselves in the pattern on the wall. The boldness of outline, variance of linear texture and professionalism with which each line is marked (which itself is demonstrative of her training as a graphic designer), and the context of hospitalisation in which Applebroog made these drawings, lends them an organic cellularity that is no less than menacing. “I am more interested in doing something to the viewer than saying something to the viewer,” Applebroog would say later, in a documentary film made by Beth B, her daughter, in 2016. They resemble at once the cellular forms seen through a microscope and geographic formations seen macroscopically from a great height or outer space. Indeed, it cannot be ignored in the midst of pandemic that they bear an uncanny resemblance to magnified (and viral) photographic images of the coronavirus, which takes its name from the pricked, crownlike circumference of its membrane. This is especially the case in those drawings in which ‘wet’ media like ink and watercolour predominate, as the clouds of colour, and the black boundaries that seem to be trying to contain or exclude them, smudge and bleed.  At a symposium held at University College London in 2011, Applebroog talked about the years 1969 and 1970 – just after she had moved from Chicago to San Diego – as a time in which she craved sanctuary. The lines in these drawings are indeed boundaries, topographical in both the geographic and biological senses of the word. They are barriers within and outside of our bodies, which, for Applebroog – a self-described feminist who has often said that at a young age she learned ‘how power works’ – amount to the same thing. Her biology, as a woman, has proven to be restrictive, and yet the walls society has built to restrict her are not of her own body or her own will. At the same time, walls, boundaries, isolation, when it is her choice to be isolated, are conducive to introspection, sanctuary and – in the case of Mercy Hospital – recuperation.
ArtReview℗Beyond Measure: Artists Expose the Absurdity of Normality℗Stefanie Hessler℗Reviews℗21/05/2020℗An exhibition at Trondheim Kunstmuseum scrutinises the standards on which notions of normalcy hinge℗Times of crisis turn normality oblique, even unrecognisable. They expose the habitual as a fragile construction. Beyond Measure scrutinises the standards and parameters on which notions of normalcy hinge. Extending the lineage of artists such as On Kawara, who, from the 1960s onward, created extreme yet ostensibly objective rules for his work and followed them rigorously, the show turns to eight contemporary artists’ takes on measurability and, notably, its failures. Humour is present throughout the exhibition, for instance in Vida Lavén’s sculptures Non Record Attempts II – World’s Second Largest Teddy Bear (2019) and Non Record Attempts III (2019), supposedly the world’s second-largest and second-smallest toy teddies displayed side by side, neither of which will ever make it into any Guinness World Records. Oddvar I.N. Daren’s Measuring the Depth of Snow (1982), meanwhile, depicts the artist in eight succeeding photographs sinking deeper into a snow mound, as displaced blocks of snow, their height apparently equivalent to the depth of his body, stack up in front of him. The sinister consequences of attempts to measure the unquantifiable are evident in Meriç Algün’s Billboards (2012) pasted onto the museum walls. Each features a question concerning a person’s relationship status and mental health, permitting only binary answers of yes and no, and taken from standardised forms Algün had to submit when applying for European citizenship. Forms such as these encode bias disguised as objectivity into decisions deeply affecting people’s lives, and in some cases preside over life and death. Approaching objectivity from another angle, Toril Johannessen’s series of silkscreen prints, Words and Years (2010–16), scrutinises the language and methodologies of science. Counting how often a particular word, for instance ‘feminism’, is published in journals, the findings are presented in convincing diagrams that seem to tell us something about the world but are ultimately meaningless. The pointlessness of numbers without content is present also in Alexander Gutke’s installation Singularity (2010–16). The work consists of a 16mm film of a tape measure projected onto the wall in a corner, which appears to measure the size of the room, but remains a pseudo-scientific gesture.  Ragnar Kjartansson’s nine-channel video installation Scenes from Western Culture (2015) is arguably the centrepiece of the show. The individually titled videos, lasting from one and a half minutes to over three hours, expose the absurdity of standards of normalcy, or rather what is considered normal in Western societies. Dog and Clock depicts a well-groomed canine lounging on a carpet in a domestic space decorated with midcentury furniture. A pendulum clock is ticking relentlessly, African sculptures on the ledge of a fireplace complement the bourgeois scene, evoking the ennui of comfort. Rich German Children shows a group of wholesome-looking kids playing in a spruced-up garden, and Dinner follows a couple, played by musicians Alicia Hall Moran and Jason Moran, dining at an upscale New York restaurant while half-engaged in trivial conversations. As Kjartansson’s durational videos push ‘normal’ situations from Western societies to their absurdist extremes, the work delivers a funny and scathing critique of the standards of a culture whose short-sightedness of its own conventions dictates profoundly flawed notions of the ordinary. At a time when science is key to grappling with the climate crisis or a virus spreading around the world, Beyond Measure reminds us of the limitations of numbers no matter how vital they are, insisting convincingly on the unquantifiable power of art.
ArtReview℗The Dialectic of Pop℗Ben Eastham℗Book Review℗19/05/2020℗Three books by European critical theorists seek to formulate a philosophy of pop music, by way of Rihanna, Fatima Al Qadiri and Kraftwerk℗Agnès Gayraud, Dialectic of Pop, translated by Robin Mackay, Daniel Miller, Nina Power (Urbanomic) Jörg Heiser, Double Lives in Art and Pop Music, translated by Nicholas Grindell (Sternberg Press) Uwe Schütte, Kraftwerk: Future Music from Germany (Penguin) ‘Popular music’, sniffs Theodor Adorno in his 1941 essay on the subject, is inferior to ‘serious music’ because it distracts listeners from making the painful intellectual effort needed to see through the lies that cloak the structures of power. But Adorno wasn’t in Jamaica during the great sound clashes, nor at the first Can show in Cologne. He never cleared the queue at Berlin’s Berghain as the sun broke over the horizon or danced to Donna Summer’s I Feel Love (1977) at a suburban house party hosted by a perfect stranger. When it comes to his passing judgment on the liberating effects of pop music, he didn’t know what he was talking about. While it’s tempting to state that the affective experience of pop music justifies itself, this is unlikely to pass muster in continental philosophy departments. Three books by European critical theorists on pop music – the term here divested of its bubblegum Anglosphere associations and encompassing everything from krautrock to hip-hop – attempt to square the circle. Their task is complicated by Europe’s ambivalent relationship to pop: recall the students in Jean-Luc Godard’s 1968 Sympathy for the Devil, who argue that rock ’n’ roll is a symptom of American cultural imperialism and bebop is the authentic expression of revolutionary consciousness (though, of course, Adorno hated jazz). Each book at some point addresses itself to the leader of the Frankfurt School, suggesting that those devoted to both Adorno’s Minima Moralia (1951) and Joy Division find it difficult to accept that the author of the former would have rolled his eyes at the latter. Such hankering speaks to the conflicts underpinning any attempt to formulate a philosophy of pop music. The foremost of these is that subordinating the emotional experience of pop to the categories of critical theory risks domesticating it. Nothing is more likely to convinceme that the Sex Pistols were a distraction from revolution than being lectured about how revolutionary they were. The academicisation of pop might seem analogous to its commodification by the market, a means of dissecting it in order to illustrate a narrative or serve a reproducible commercial function. These are the paradoxes of which any theorist of pop who is also a fan must be aware. Agnès Gayraud, a philosopher who also makes witty, Gainsbourgish chamber pop as La Féline, makes a virtue of these contradictions by turning Adorno’s method against him. Her brilliantly executed theory of what he dismissed as ‘standardised light popular music’ does not attempt to reconcile intellect and emotion but instead sets them up as antagonistic impulses that contribute to the ‘dialectic of pop’. The form is not compromised but instead enlivened by its manifold antitheses: between novelty and revivalism, authenticity and affectation, nihilism and utopianism, avant-garde ‘anti-pop’ and mainstream ‘pop’. The dialectic is negative per Adorno, because there is no promise of resolution; the coup de grâce is to demonstrate that these self-reflexive processes preserve pop’s autonomy by failing to map onto what Gayraud (who, it must be remembered, is French) calls ‘the Procrustean bed of rational progress’. Taking examples from Joe Meek to Rihanna, she makes a convincing argument that this restless back-and-forth generates the ‘hybridisations and transformations’ that keep pop music alive. First published in German in 2015, Jörg Heiser’s Double Lives in Art and Pop Music traces a comparably dialectical relationship. Through chapters exploring modes of exchange between the two fields – collaborations (Yoko Ono and John Lennon), crossovers (Joseph Beuys’s regret- table foray into agit-pop) and dual competency (from Carsten Nicolai to Fatima Al Qadiri) – Heiser develops a theory in which ‘context switching’ between disciplines generates the energy on which both feed. His early warning against art or music’s retreat into its own specialisms is familiar, but Heiser is quick to challenge the assumption that ‘blurring boundaries’ is inherently good. What elevates Heiser’s book is how this relationship between art and music serves as case study for a society in which boundaries – between creativity and labour, public and private, work and leisure – are also breaking down. While introducing dancers into a sculpture exhibition for no good reason not only infuriates anyone who likes either sculpture or dance, it is symptomatic of neoliberalism’s tendency towards the creation of a single, undifferentiated market for its commodities. Why appeal only to a sculpture audience if you can appeal to a dance audience? And a lifestyle audience, and an audience interested in ‘culture’…  In this model, the Romantic ideal of the gesamtkunstwerk is revealed as the formal expression of an exploitative society founded upon the merger of industries, deskilling and the erosion of workers’ rights. Rather than dissolving categories or erecting barriers between them, Heiser suggests we maintain a (fluctuating) separation between fields, then learn how to step between them. This not only prevents art and pop from being subsumed by the culture industry but might also help workers resist their own exploitation. All of which is wrapped up in a deeply engaging history of the encounters between art and pop, from The Velvet Underground to Michaela Melián. Both Gayraud and Heiser devote considerable attention to Kraftwerk, which only highlights how little Uwe Schütte’s workmanlike biography of the band shares their anxieties around the assimilation and academicisation of pop music. It is replete with examples of ‘context switching’ – from a vision of Germany’s future drawn from prewar culture to the sly appropriation of avant-garde artistic strategies. Yet rather than interrogate these tensions, Schütte celebrates the ‘convergence’ of art and music, and, rather ominously, the seamless ‘fusion’ of man and machine. One is left wondering if the reconciliations he identifies and seems determined to accelerate – between art and music, museum and concert hall, pop and the academy – are an unqualified good. 
ArtReview℗The Artists Who Found Inspiration in Kafka’s ‘Trilogy of Loneliness’℗Barbara Casavecchia℗Reviews℗19/05/2020℗K at Fondazione Prada, Milan, brings together works by Martin Kippenberger, Orson Welles and Tangerine Dream℗K brings together an installation by Martin Kippenberger (The Happy End of Franz Kafka’s Amerika, 1994), a film by Orson Welles (The Trial, 1962) and an album by Tangerine Dream (Franz Kafka – The Castle, 2013). The title refers primarily to Kafka, whose unfinished novels Amerika, The Trial and The Castle (all posthumously edited by Kafka’s friend Max Brod and published between 1925 and 1927) inspired the three works on show – albeit with plenty of poetic licence. In his catalogue introduction, curator Udo Kittelmann describes the exhibition as ‘a story, not unlike a parable, about “the darkest concerns of human life”’ (a quote from Walter Benjamin’s essay on Kafka), its structure a triptych or altarpiece whose parts are ‘presented entirely separately from one another (…), both in space and time’. Kippenberger’s The Happy End… is installed in Fondazione Prada’s main ‘Podium’ space, encased in spectacular glass walls. The installation represents an imaginary conclusion to Kafka’s story, whose protagonist Karl Rossmann applies for a position in, as Kafka describes it, ‘the largest theatre in the world’ (that is, rampant American capitalism), after reading a poster proclaiming: ‘All welcome! Anyone who wants to be an artist, step forward!’, only to find himself engulfed in never-ending interviews for hapless jobs. On a well-lit green soccer field, flanked by bleachers and referee high-chairs, Kippenberger recreates the imaginary dialogues with an orderly grid of threesomes, each comprising an empty desk and two chairs of various designs and epochs, to suggest a multitude of discourses across time. Orson Welles’s claustrophobic and darkly humorous masterpiece, starring Anthony Perkins as Josef K, is screened in the foundation’s huge in-house cinema. In an iconic sequence, echoing Kippenberger’s work, K walks through a vast office filled with rows of typing clerks at work at their desks; Welles shot it in the halls of the Zagreb Fair, with 850 identical desks and 850 extras. The movie, too, ends on a slightly brighter note than the novel: instead of being executed ‘like a dog’, K bravely laughs in the faces of his slayers. Finally, music by Tangerine Dream is played on a loop in the twin ‘Cisterna’ spaces, fitted with purple carpeting, purple lights and comfortable loungers, as if to recreate the atmosphere and tint of ambient music, the genre pioneered by the legendary Krautrock band since the early 1970s.  After the drastic measures of social distancing induced by COVID-19, Kittelmann’s remarks on the topicality of Kafka’s ‘trilogy of loneliness’ and the ‘widespread fear of an epoch-making transformation of an unknown scale’ inevitably stand out. And yet, the impossibility of visiting K after a certain point reveals another aspect of the show’s cross-disciplinary approach, strategically merging three strands (art, cinema, music) of the foundation’s programme. K’s potential to alter the temporality of an average visit works also in the present tense, when all contents are forced to migrate online. Welles’s film and Tangerine Dream’s album are only a click away from everybody’s devices, and I have played them on loop to keep me company while writing, bent over my home desk like millions of other people across the globe. The final track of Franz Kafka – The Castle is titled A Place of Mercy, described thus in the sleeve notes: ‘It is not necessary to leave one’s house. Remain at your desk and hark. Don’t even hark, just wait. Don’t wait, stay completely quiet and alone. The world will open itself up for its decipherment, it is incapable of anything else, you have triumphed and at last it will wind rapturously on the floor before you.’ The happy end indeed?
ArtReview℗A Metric of Grievability℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Book Review℗15/05/2020℗Judith Butler’s ‘The Force of Nonviolence’ unpicks how violence is framed as legitimate or illegitimate℗Halfway through The Force of Nonviolence, Judith Butler observes that ‘we might prefer to adopt a humanist framework and assert that everyone, regardless of race, religion, or origin, has a life that is grievable, and then to militate for an acceptance of that basic equality’. But, she goes on, in adhering to the ideal ‘that every life ought to be grievable’, ‘we badly misrepresent reality, in which radical inequalities abound’. This is a world in which ‘lives are not equally valued’, one of ‘racism, xenophobia, homophobia and transphobia, misogyny, and the systematic disregard for the poor and dispossessed’. Why whole societies currently seem to accept – and ignore – the deaths of human lives at home and abroad is the moral and political problem that exercises Butler throughout The Force of Nonviolence. Butler – celebrated for her seminal book Gender Trouble (1990) – here combines deconstruction and psychoanalysis to unpick how violence is framed as legitimate or illegitimate, and how, perversely, those who are most powerless are often designated – by the power of the state – as the source of violence, whereas ‘state violence’ always cloaks itself in the language of legitimate ‘force’. Invoking Michel Foucault’s concept of biopolitics, Butler highlights how contemporary biopolitical power over life differs from the ‘power of the sovereign’: while the sovereign could, in Foucault’s terms, ‘make die or let live’, the biopolitical has the power ‘to make live or to let die’. This form of power is both everywhere and nowhere, not least in the ‘phantasmagoria of racism’ that might explain the actions of, say, police officers killing black Americans who pose no threat: how, Butler asks, could Walter Scott, shot dead in 2015 as he ran away from South Carolina police, ‘become phantasmagorically turned around, made into a threatening figure to be killed?’ Or similarly, how can we understand how European governments disavow responsibility for ‘the thousands of migrants who have lost their lives in the Mediterranean’? Racism, here, informs what Butler calls the ‘metric of grievability’, which deems such lives ‘not worthy of safeguarding’. Butler’s attempt to explain this moral vacuity, even while liberal society pays lip-service to the notion of equality of human rights, leads her into a complex psychoanalytical exploration of how the individual subject, and entire societies, imagine others as a violent threat against their own selfhood. Going back to the theories of psychoanalysts Sigmund Freud and Melanie Klein, Butler examines the ambiguities that lie at the heart of the social bond between people – the tensions between love and hate, nurture and loss, hostility and dependency – which she then maps onto the social realm. Returning to Freud’s concept of the ‘death drive’, Butler argues that rather than deny the destructive drives that human beings harbour, an ethics of nonviolence should emphasise the life of the social bond not as the individualist liberal concept of a ‘contract’ between otherwise independent, competing individuals, but as ‘based in embodied forms of interdependency’. ‘The obligation not to destroy each other’, she writes, ‘emerges from the vexed social form of our lives, and leads us to reconsider whether self-preservation is not linked to preserving the lives of others.’ The limit of Butler’s psychoanalytical horizon, though, is that it cannot really explain what lies behind the ‘war-logic’ that distorts people’s capacity for solidarity into a paranoid fear of others. Butler’s examination of the correspondence between Freud and Albert Einstein (published in 1933) regarding the psychological motivations of populations during the rise of fascism, offers insights into how people lose their inhibitions against violence towards others, but tells us nothing about the economic and political causes of war. So The Force of Nonviolence is frustrating for its lack of substantial suggestions for which political forms might embody this ethics of nonviolence. Perhaps it flickers into view for a moment, but Butler barely registers it: ‘Freud’, she writes, ‘speculated that an evolution of the masses may be possible through education and the cultivation of solidaristic sentiments of a non-nationalist sort.’ If there is a name for the political form of radical equality and reciprocity in the social bond, it is democracy. Yet Butler names it only once, and passes it by.
ArtReview℗Alessandro Balteo-Yazbeck at Galerie Martin Janda, Vienna℗Max L. Feldman℗Reviews℗14/05/2020℗‘All the Lands from Sunrise to Sunset’ transforms classic imperialist maxims into hashtags ℗Named after ancient Mesopotamian king Sargon of Akkad’s bold claims about the extent of his rule, this exhibition crams 25 works, including colourful paper collages, sculptures, installations, found objects and a video – the fruits of four series and three collaborations from 2004 to 2019 – into all three floors of the gallery. The titular paper collage series (2018), video installation Chronoscope 1952 or 1953 11pm (1) (2012–17) and Ian’s Gulf (maps version) (2018) are clearly part of the Venezuelan-born, Berlin-based artist’s critique of cultural imperialism. In other works, this is brought to bear on contemporary art production per se. Edward W. Said justified the limited scope of his essay collection Culture and Imperialism (1993) by referring to the ‘unique coherence and special cultural centrality’ of British, French and American imperialism. With the title series, Balteo-Yazbeck displaces some of these expectations by going further back into history, turning classic imperialist maxims from ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, Persia and more into email addresses and hashtags. He does so using familiar typefaces from consumer goods against a background of fragments from fashion magazines, holiday snaps and stock photos, like an extravagant ransom note. Some titles refer to imperialist projects that saw themselves as Sargon of Akkad did (cesar@marenostrum.ad, britain1821@sunneversets.co.uk), but others – #benevolentglobalhegemony, #encodingworlddominationgenealogy and dominion@planet.com – point to continuities between earlier empires and neoconservatism or today’s Silicon Valley ideology. Each piece’s fractured, patchwork feel mimics how empires impose powerful interests (gods, laws, economic activity) on diverse groups. By inviting us to look at ancient empires using the visual codes of the present, Balteo-Yazbeck suggests that today’s networked culture gives the world a more uniform look than any historical empire despite its eclectic style. The collages line the walls of the shorter part of the gallery’s L-shaped main space. Five sculptures made from olive wood, o.k., Nail Polish 3000 bc, gps 1973, Opposable Thumb and Carving Coal Since 4000 bc (all 2018), irreverently modified remakes of works by an artist identified as Attilio Napolitano, stand on cylindrical plinths in the middle. These uncanny handlike figures grasping the air are like ghouls trying to escape a graveyard; or warnings against trespass from some deep forest, repurposed with a folk-art feel. And though the lacquer applied to Nail Polish 3000 bc updates something ancient-looking, the macabre imperialism/artistic-domination connection is clearer when the source material is more recent. Comfort (2019), for example, based on an adjustable chaise longue designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe in 1927 and made partly from solar panels and electronic components connecting it to a contemporary Ikea stool based on an Alvar Aalto design, suggests a link between intellectual property and classic critiques of hegemony. This continues upstairs with Warao Chinchorro / Hammock (Water-Oil) (2004–14) – a hammock woven by members of the Warao people (indigenous to the Orinoco Delta) with a framed 2010 untitled pigment print by still-life photographer Holger Niehaus lying in it – implicating contemporary art in that critique. The connection is solidified downstairs. Chronoscope 1952 or 1953 11pm (1), a CBS public affairs show about early Cold War American military interests – which the artist has playfully defaced by digitally overlaying pink and green ink on the presenters’ eyes and mouths – faces Ian’s Gulf (Maps Version), two individually framed maps of the Middle East taken from a 1951 edition of Fortune magazine, indicating strategic geographies and available raw materials in the same colours. Balteo-Yazbeck’s point, evidently, is this: imperialist extractivism treats the world as a resource to be marketised, but that greedy process is also at play in the conceptual vampirism of contemporary art itself.
ArtReview℗Billie Zangewa at Galerie Templon, Paris℗Daisy Sainsbury℗Reviews℗13/05/2020℗A show that focuses on love, the universal and sensory experiences℗As the opening day of Billie Zangewa’s show drew to a close, few would have anticipated the circumstances that would soon engulf it, nor the new resonances her work would find in light of them. While visitors trickled out of Galerie Templon, Emmanuel Macron announced new measures to combat COVID-19. In the days that followed, the country went into lockdown: the gallery closed its doors; daily life changed for everyone. Born in Malawi and based in Johannesburg, Zangewa creates embroidered silk works that celebrate those aspects of the day-to-day that pass unnoticed until they are gone: a school run, a swimming lesson, a birthday party with friends. The importance of the everyday is embedded in the choice of her medium. In interviews she has described how the appeal of textile lies in how it constitutes a universal, sensory experience that punctuates all our daily lives. In a show that focuses on love, touch is also the point of contact between the individual and the external world, the physical encounter between self and other. This is nowhere more apparent than in Soldier of Love (2020), which depicts the artist walking her young son to school, his hand in hers. Her body leans towards his, the viewer can almost feel his weight pulling on her. The work’s title evokes the show’s central theme: the duality of love and struggle that underpins existence. It would be easy to dismiss as a cliché, but sometimes the most well-worn phrases contain the greatest truths.   Zangewa is the protagonist in all but three of the ten tapestries exhibited, where identity is conveyed as multiple, contradictory and above all constructed through its everyday expression. The serene domestic scenes of Sunday Morning Pursuits (2020) – browsing the newspaper – or Cold Shower (2019) contrast with the more anguished self-portrait Am I Enough? (2020). In this simple composition, stripped of background noise, the artist confronts the viewer, naked. The title’s question reverberates in the hesitancy of her pose, at once defiant as she presents her body to the viewer, but also uncomfortable, as she looks away, refusing to meet that gaze. The artist uses her medium to full advantage: her body is sewn from fragments of silk that reflect the way the light hits her skin, but also evoke a self in construction, assembled and reassembled. The torn sections in the tapestry are a frequent feature of Zangewa’s work, and speak, as the artist has described, to the darker, more traumatic aspects of experience, present but never fully revealed to the viewer. This practice reappears in The Swimming Lesson (2020), the largest and perhaps most emotionally charged work in the exhibition. Here, the artist’s son sits alone on the side of a swimming pool; vast swathes of cloth missing from the foreground indicate the absence of figures from the original scene – the swimming instructor and Zangewa herself. The work captures the simultaneous distress of a parent forced to relinquish control, and the joy of seeing that child grow into an autonomous adult. One of the exhibition’s most striking works is Birthday Party (2020), a bright, busy composition where friends and family gather around a table. Unlike the other works on show, the characters are depicted without facial features, the traits of individuality suppressed to accentuate the collective energy of the scene and to mark the passage from the particular to the universal. Zangewa’s works don’t need a pandemic to be appreciated, but perhaps now more than ever we understand why it is the minutiae of the everyday, and the relationships that play out within it, that we should all be celebrating.
ArtReview℗VR Vertigo No 3: Privilege of Presence℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Reviews℗08/05/2020℗How will a virtual artworld resolve its VIP problem? ℗Artworks must be feeling lonely right now. No gallery-goer to observe them, no collector to purchase them. Faced with the disruption of lockdown, galleries, institutions and art fairs are scrambling to use technology to keep channels open to their public, be they the collectors who drive art fairs and commercial galleries, or the wider public who see art but don’t buy it, as galleries and art-fair halls remain deserted. The past week alone has seen megagallery Hauser &amp; Wirth launch its virtual exhibition of works at its yet-to-be-opened ‘art centre’ on the islet of Isla del Rey, Menorca; Frieze is throwing open the doors to its ‘Frieze Viewing Room’ (8–15 May) to replace its cancelled New York edition; and even resilient regional art gallery Hastings Contemporary has been able to inaugurate its new exhibition of much-loved illustrator Quentin Blake, with the aid of an online telepresence robot that navigates the otherwise empty galleries for remote viewers.  If these often hastily developed experiments in virtualising the traditional artworld experience of objects and spaces demonstrate anything, it’s that even big artworld players are just as novice in responding to the new conditions as smaller outfits with fewer resources. No one knows how these initiatives will succeed, and what these very different projects starkly reveal is how the exclusivity the artworld and art market once depended on has been disrupted by the fact that there’s currently nowhere physical to exclude people from, during the time that everyone is working with the same combination of confinement and digital distancing.  Comically, exclusivity has had to be reinvented. There is, after all, something faintly absurd about the ‘VIP’ preview of Frieze Viewing Rooms, where, without a VIP code, one can’t access the 200 galleries, institutions and nonprofits that get to present the works they couldn’t in New York – until the ‘public’ viewing that opens on Friday. The habits of physical exclusivity die hard, since the key aspect of such art-fair privileges is who gets priority access to gallerists and first choice of works – something once enforced by the schedule of ultra-VIP, VIP and ordinary access to fairs.  But without a big tent or an exhibition hall, virtual fair editions can’t be much different from online shop-window platforms such as Artsy: it will be interesting to see how the world of online viewing-and-buying platforms might shake out in the coming year, as the big fairs have to retool themselves as prestige online viewing rooms, encroaching on the territory of these other established platforms. And as the physical constraints and costs of art-fair exclusivity dissolve, there’s no reason why commercial galleries shouldn’t form alternative assemblies to reboot the online viewing-platform under their own control. After all, the oldest contemporary art fairs, such as Art Cologne and Art Brussels, were started on that basis.  Physical exclusivity, then, will likely evolve new forms as the tempo of the global art fair circuit stalls. And in the world of megagalleries, the contradictions of accessibility and exclusivity are entertainingly confused in Hauser &amp; Wirth’s first foray into VR-exhibition making, in its staging of Beside Itself, the first outing for its ‘HWVR’ virtual modelling platform, showing what a show might look like in the new galleries of its Menorca art centre – an eighteenth-century former naval hospital – when it’s eventually completed.   Trumpeted as a ‘first in in virtual reality exhibition modelling’, and apparently using a ‘bespoke technology-stack not found in any other industry’, Beside Itself is actually rather clumsy – as VR gallery viewers go, it’s no match for a Matterport rendering (this writer’s current favourite). As one only jumps from one spot in front of a work to another, with no transition in between, one quickly loses sense of orientation, and it’s impossible to get a closer look at the blue-chip works hanging on the pristine walls. Perhaps that’s not the point. After a while of reading the caption for a work by, say, Jenny Holzer or Ellen Gallagher, rather than looking at the work itself, you’re dizzily wondering which end of the gallery you’re at, and how to get out into the sun.  Of course, Beside Itself is more than anything an advert for the soon-to-be-complete architectural elegance of the Menorca complex and, by subtle hinting, of the rarefied tastefulness of this tiny island, the bucolic architecture and the lush gardens that will underpin the experience-value of the centre – one that, while pitched at the local community, will equally offer prestige viewing conditions for those sojourning in the Balearics, who might want to drop in to make a leisured purchase from Hauser &amp; Wirth.  ‘The community’, or ‘ordinary people’, as they’re sometimes known, are also shut out of art galleries, particularly public institutions, many of which are facing financially precarious futures. It’s a fair distance from the sunny shores of Menorca to the beaches of Hastings, in Sussex, but it’s worth noting Hastings Contemporary’s launch of its new show by the artist and children’s illustrator Quentin Blake, not least for its use of a physical viewing ‘robot’ – a remotely steered video-camera tablet mounted on a Segway-like wheeled base. It’s another technology that’s been around for a while – California outfit Double Robotics has been making its telepresence robots since 2013 – that’s been pulled into the art context. This writer isn’t sure that a gallery full of robot viewers is the future – not, at least, on a choppy wi-fi connection – but the desire to make physical artworks shown in situ accessible remotely should be cheered – it’ll just need better cameras and faster connections. 
ArtReview℗VR Vertigo No 2: Chris Dorland℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Reviews℗01/05/2020℗Virtual art in a virtual space – are there signs that the genre is finally getting real?℗For this critic, one of the few unexpected pleasures of life in lockdown has been exploring art exhibitions presented through VR. As I’ve argued, the VR exhibition reminds us to celebrate the value of material artworks and the freedom to encounter them in public space, while opening us up to the reality of art venues far away. Moreover, some artists are already investigating the paradoxes and the ironies thrown up by the situation of shows that no one can visit IRL, and the character of VR technology itself: John Armleder and Rob Pruitt’s recent show for Massimo De Carlo’s VirtualSpace allowed one to walk round a synthetically created (rather than photographed and scanned) space in which their work was exhibited, while having to negotiate the potted plants that occupied some of the gallery space, and perhaps wondering why Pruitt has arranged his set of elegant salvaged chairs covered in gold tape (Chairs, all 2019) on another side of the gallery. Who needs to sit down in virtual space, after all? Things get more strangely complicated, though, when digital art – a strand of contemporary art with an ambiguous relationship to gallery space at the best of times – goes into a virtual space. One of the more haunting VR shows currently online is Chris Dorland’s FLR-13, on East London gallery Nicoletti Contemporary’s website. A series of interlinked CGI rooms, dark but for the glow of the red-neon wireframe grids that make up the ‘spaces’ (mapped from Nicoletti’s actual Vyner Street gallery space, according to the press notes), are host to ‘screens’ that are themselves showing what we might take as ‘videoworks’. FLR-13 refers to the 13th floor of highrises, which is often omitted as a numbered floor in some of the world’s more superstitious cultures (in which 13 is an unlucky number – other numbers for other cultures). Hidden, alternate-reality floors of buildings have a long pedigree of pop-cultural paranoia since at least The Twilight Zone episode The After Hours(1960). At Nicoletti, Dorland’s ‘video artworks’ exist in this alternate-reality space – the gallery but not the gallery, and parallel a series of other works we see were exhibited in Dorland’s accompanying real-life exhibition Active User, which opened in January and closed with the lockdown. Dorland’s video sequences are shifting, flickering, stuttering collages of visual glitch – in the first space we ‘enter’ we see broken fields of algorithmic noise that then morph into more liquid, viscous forms, glistening like haemoglobin. Turning into the main space is another, bigger, room-dividing screen showing a denser and more complex sequence. Dorland adds to the disorientation by staging these sequences as if they were seen on a screen in a space identical to the one we’re in; as the point of view moves away and circles them, we see the shiny reflective floor (full of dark, glasslike fracture-lines) and the gridded walls that surround them. If we’re in any doubt that Dorland is messing with our sense of place and corporeality, the work on the main screen pushes this question to a grotesque, absurd conclusion – as we watch the circling sequence of the screen that is the space we’re already (virtually) in, a weird amoebalike substance distends out of the screen’s ‘surface’. This liquid projects through both sides of the zero-thickness screen in the depicted space but doesn’t penetrate ‘our’ space. It is not a pleasant experience, a queasy nightmare with retro echoes of early VR-obsessed films The Matrix (1999) and Lawnmower Man (1992). Dorland’s notes refer to the show’s inspiration in the work of novelist Philip K. Dick, and FLR-13 is something of a homage to Dick’s deeply paranoid vision of how contemporary society and technology were on course to disintegrate the fragile distinctions between subjectivity, the body and reality. Its spectacle of infinite regress isn’t just about collapsing the material and the virtual, but a more disconcerting reflection on who it is that is doing the seeing, and where we (or they) are. In Dick’s extraordinary novel A Scanner Darkly (1974), the protagonist, a druggy dropout who is also an undercover cop charged with investigating the drug trade, can monitor his housemates remotely, wears a camouflage suit that disguises his identity and eventually splits his personality into two different individuals under the influence of the drug he’s investigating. Those anxieties seem refracted in FLR-13. Shut in during the lockdown, one’s idea of real life, of a world going on ‘out there’, becomes swallowed up by the almost all-encompassing power of the screen, since experiencing it and acting in it are reduced to little more than reacting to news and social media. It’s a world Dick would have recognised. With horror.
ArtReview℗VR Vertigo No 1: Josh Kline℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Reviews℗24/04/2020℗Locked down in the UK, a critic still manages to visit a show in Seoul℗It seems like a long time since I took a train; even longer since I stepped into a gallery. Suddenly everything seems so far away. One’s sense of place and proximity take a hit during ‘lockdown’. We hear of galleries reopening in Germany, for example, but in the UK, for the time being, we’re still stuck inside. A walk in the sunlight to the inside of my local supermarket is what constitutes travel and entertainment these days. That lack of access to public space, as I suggested in a previous article, weighs heavy on the contemporary artworld at the moment. For a critic, ‘doing the rounds’ – trying to see as much of what’s on show as possible – is part of the job description. Following familiar artists as they essay new things, and discovering artists and works you’d never heard of, are the rewards of this happenstance process. So with that possibility suspended, I’ve turned to checking out virtual shows. Just to keep my hand in. Just to get out a bit. Detached from any requirement for physical movement, ‘doing the rounds’ produces a sense of vertigo. One minute I’m in Seoul, the next in New York, then Antwerp, then Hong Kong. And yet I’ve never moved. But nevertheless, the reflexes of being a critic – of watching out for familiar artists’ names while being curious about those you’ve never heard of – kick in. Dropping in on Various Small Fires’s Seoul branch (I mention this only inasmuch as such geographies count when they are mapped in clicks rather than airmiles), one finds Josh Kline’s stark and ominous Alternative Facts – wall-mounted casts of flatscreen televisions, wrapped and encrusted with the American flag. It’s a simple, brutal gesture – screens are now the source of ‘fake news’, objects that we no longer trust as points of access to ‘truth’. Kline’s messed-up Stars and Stripes obliterates this ‘window’ in a declaration of its own chaotic power and, perhaps, as a mournful tribute to the global utopian goals that the screen used to represent. Moreover, when presented in Korea (where other people can go and see the show for real, by appointment), where US power has been a constant in postwar politics, Kline’s monitors hint at the frayed, though still global, influence of the American superpower. Kline’s show, however, makes me acutely aware that the artworld always likes to comment on the political of the world ‘outside’ its own distinct circuits (of which this article and the website it’s hosted on are a part). Those media circuits make art visible across thousands of kilometres, allowing physical objects made by artists to have conversations with us about what’s ‘going on in the world right now’. Such circuits give access to the work, but do they still need a work that exists, somewhere? After all, do we really need to see Kline’s works ‘in the flesh’? Couldn’t artists just write about US power, or simply make two-dimensional, online-only images about it? Perhaps it’s the mix of lockdown fever and VR vertigo talking, but the paradox is that these physical objects – these epoxy-resin-caked, nylon-flag-wrapped flatscreen monitors – are so weirdly particular that even seen in reproduction, inside a 3D reproduction of a space, they explain themselves, despite all that fakery, as stubbornly material objects – things first, images next – and that this has its own discursive value. Kline, I suspect, is wise to this. His Reality Television works (as most of the works shown here are titled, all from 2020) have too much of the all-over look of American Abstract Expressionist painting (with additional art-history-nerd references to Jasper Johns) not to be seen as references to other endlessly reproduced art-objects . And the history of Abstract Expressionism, as a tool in US Cold War power games during the 1950s and 1960s, is another vague shadow that inhabits these works. Meanwhile, his dysfunctional screens, presented to us through and on screens, alert us to the fact that images are representations of what’s going on in reality, not reality itself. That the flags wrap the monitors front and back – curtailing any sense of there being something fictitious or imaginary ‘through’ the screen – brings us back to the sheer, opaque and (eventually) brute physical nature of political power, beyond the shifting, unreliable imagery that flickers to legitimate it.
ArtReview℗Hello to All That℗Martin Herbert℗Reviews℗15/04/2020℗A Mary Beth Edelson exhibition proves impossible to shake℗On social media the other day, I made a quip: ‘We’re all art historians now’. As with many jokes, or at least many of mine, it was half-serious: when there are no new exhibitions except (inevitably dissatisfying) digital ones, the mind is borne back upon the past. Usually I see more shows than I can write about, and sometimes I don’t happen to write about the ones I really like; on occasion the experience of seeing a show exceeds the parameters of an exhibition review, being tangled up with life, happenstance, sadness. So I want to say something about Mary Beth Edelson’s exhibition in New York exactly a year ago, which I found extraordinary at the time and which has lingered in my memory since, but in order to do so I have to step, at least temporarily, outside the confines of the art and the strictures of the review format. Edelson is a pioneering American feminist artist, born in Chicago in 1933 and, until recently, a long-term denizen of downtown Manhattan. Something of her character can perhaps be gauged from this quote, in an Artforum interview from 2011: ‘There is a feminist adage: the master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house. To which I say: Let’s get some other tools! Fuck his house – who goes there anyway?’ My wife, the artist Eva Grubinger, has known Edelson for many years and introduced me to her in 2015 at the opening of a survey of feminist art in Hamburg. Edelson was friendly but flinty. I didn’t really know her work at that time and didn’t talk to her beyond hellos – you assume there’ll be another moment, or it doesn’t really matter, and for now two friends were catching up. Then, for a while, it was apparently hard to contact her. Last year, when I was back in the city, I saw that she had a solo show at David Lewis Gallery on the Lower East Side. A good sign, I thought. The exhibition, titled Shape Shifter, was modestly scaled but nevertheless the most captivating show I saw during that trip, and a highlight of my gallery-going year. (I took Carol Bove, about whom I was writing a book; no slouch herself, Bove said she was hugely impressed.) But it wasn’t new work. It was, like Edelson’s previous show in the same venue, art from the 1970s freshly de-mothballed. The main event was a roomful of painted-plywood cutout ‘figures’, or semiabstractions, or totems, dating from 1974–75: to get in there, you had to step around one, a circle impaled on a triangle, which all but blocked the door. The room, with these human-size and roughly patterned entities gathered around the viewer – heliocentric hemispheres atop triangles, others with schematic upraised arms, one like a giant bird – felt deeply ritualistic, borderline occult, also celebratory, tapping something primordial. ‘The ascending archetypical symbol [sic] of the feminine unfold today in the psyche of modern Everywoman,’ Edelson was quoted as saying in the press release, ‘They encompass the multiple forms of the Great Goddess—Reaching across the centuries we take the hand of our Ancient Sisters.’ The rest of the show comprised small, startlingly intense black-and-white photographs made at various points during the 1970s. In one, Edelson – assumedly – appeared in a Neolithic cave, sitting in a ring of lights, some kind of strange, streaky illumination whipping its way towards her through the half-dark. In a trio of prints, something dark and blurry shakes high grasses. In another sequence, a cloth-wrapped figure rolls off the side of a cliff. In perhaps the most indelible work, Woman Rising / Sky, from 1973, Edelson stands on scrubland at (seemingly) dusk, arms outraised, an echoing white V – simple postproduction, it seems – shooting upwards above her, cracking the deepening sky. An installation view of a 1974–75 exhibition shows Edelson, then around forty, striking a balletic pose while surrounded by her then-new cutout figures, hand on hip, right foot brought up to left calf.  Mary Beth hadn’t been answering her phone, and I’d been asked to ask the gallery how, or where, she was. It turned out she was now in an assisted-living facility somewhere outside the city; I left an email address, asking if the gallery owner could pass on the details, but no email came. Of course, people get old and shift shape for the worse. But the experience of Shape Shifter, for me, was indivisible from a larger context, larger shifts. Edelson is yet another woman artist relatively sidelined for much of her later life (partly for her determined gravitation towards feminist spirituality, but partly due to good-old artworld sexism), then revived in her twilight years, just about too late for it to matter much to her. That factor played against the vivaciousness and unabashed mysticism of Edelson’s 1970s art – more alive, it seemed, than any other art being shown in the city at the time, and in tune with the esoteric art being made now – making the show wholly bittersweet alongside more mortal concerns: how quickly and irrevocably people decline in old age, the wasting of intellect and the loss of knowledge, the fadeout of an artistic vanguard and the revival of toxic masculinity and gender imparity in our own time. Ars longa…, of course, and bringing this work back into the world had to be a net positive, but it wasn’t an untainted one. Had Edelson even seen the show? All of these emotional and ethical aspects swirled around in the gallery. And in the street as we walked away. This wouldn’t be everyone’s experience of the work, but it couldn’t help being mine. A couple of months after that, Artforum published a laudatory, lengthy feature on Edelson’s 1970s work, one that nevertheless had a valedictory tone: the author, Dodie Bellamy, closed by noting that an ‘entire generation of feminist visionaries will soon be gone’. A while later, on social media again, I scratched out a hypothetical, a short-story pitch: a gallerist starts working with a ‘difficult’ woman artist of advanced age who, in a twist, turns out to be immortal. Again, only half-joking. I was thinking, first, of an Italian artist I’d recently watched being wheeled around her first retrospective, aged ninety-one and virtually blind. And I was thinking, inevitably, of Mary Beth Edelson.
ArtReview℗Naama Tsabar at Shulamit Nazarian, Los Angeles℗Jonathan Griffin℗Reviews℗05/04/2020℗Jonathan Griffin gets to grips with the tactile, mixed-media works from the installation and performance artist℗I noticed no actual signage letting gallery visitors know that it was OK to touch certain of Naama Tsabar’s wall-mounted artworks. Fortunately, Israeli-born, New York-based Tsabar is becoming increasingly well known for her interactive Works on Felt series, begun in 2012: panels of thick felt, curling away from the wall (or, initially, the floor) under tension from taut piano wires. Those wires are connected to hidden microphones, which are in turn connected to cables that hang down and plug into nearby guitar amps. When struck – as a gallery director helpfully demonstrated, encouraging me to do the same – the wires produce a twang whose pitch can be modulated by flexing the felt. Stroking the felt creates a sound too. Four iterations of the series hang in this exhibition, variations (to use Tsabar’s terminology) 21 through 24. The association with Robert Morris’s felt works of the late 1960s is unavoidable, and intentional. It is also somewhat unresolved, and ultimately a distraction from the many qualities that make these works compelling. My reading is that Morris features here as a kind of hypermasculine, authoritarian, antiexpressionistic straw man; he is one of a number of museum-grade Minimalists evoked by Tsabar (others include Ellsworth Kelly and Lucio Fontana) whose hegemony is supposedly undermined half a century after the fact by works that are tactile, interactive and feminised. (Tsabar uses female or gendernonconforming musicians when she activates her sculptures in performance – as she will towards the end of this exhibition.) To me, Morris – his bizarre 1974 Artforum ad notwithstanding – seems almost an antimacho artist: a pioneer of antiform and interactive sculptures, and a maker of entropic, defeated piles of floppy material. By contrast, Tsabar inserts carbon fibre inside her sheets of felt in order to maintain precisely the right semblance of flop, and public interaction with them is encouraged only under careful supervision. Tsabar’s Transition works, a series begun in 2015, are based on deconstructed (though still functional) guitar amps. The kind of woven fabric that would usually cover the speaker is instead stretched over large paintinglike frames; these are inset with jacks, knobs, switches and blinking red LEDs and strung with electrical cables, giving the once-dudely hardware the appearance of looms. These pieces, apparently, are not meant to be touched, although other works by the artist can be plugged into them. When they are idle, they emit a low buzz – an ironic analogy, perhaps, of the crackling aura that emanates from certain Minimalist paintings by Agnes Martin, which one superficially resembles. A new body of work, Inversions, features stringed instruments built into cavities in the gallery walls, implicitly transforming the entire building into a music-making device. In the sense that these esoteric sculptural interventions look like nothing so much as themselves, and do not rebound from preexisting artistic models or histories, they might be the most successful works in the show. Only the imperfect quality of their craftsmanship – which emulates guitar, harp, banjo and violin construction techniques – lets them down. (Luthiers set the bar pretty high.) Inversions is also the title of the show. Maybe all art must declare what it is not – what it subverts, or inverts – before we understand what it is. I just wish that the art in this exhibition – which is undeniably strong both in form and in content – prioritised its own inherent generosity and sensuality, rather than foregrounding the precedents that it so obviously means to invert.  Naama Tsabar, Inversions, Shulamit Nazarian, Los Angeles, 10 January – 29 February 2020
ArtReview℗Alain Bizos at Polka Galerie, Paris℗John Quin℗Reviews℗03/04/2020℗John Quin on crime and punishment ℗‘Good artists borrow, great artists steal’: whether Picasso said this or not, we can be pretty sure he didn’t mean pilfering down at the mall. But looking at the two black-and-white photographs that comprise Smile (1971), one suspects Alain Bizos took those words quite literally. The first photo is of an old surveillance camera and a sign that reads SMILE SHOPLIFTERS YOU ARE ON CAMERA. It sits above the second, a full-faced shot of Bizos grinning. The real action begins with Vol des lettres V.O.I. (1970), six photographs that show the artist stealing three large adhesive letters that spell out the French for ‘theft’, ‘steal’ and ‘flight’. An emboldened Bizos then graduates to larger sporting items – Vol du jeu de croquet (1971) – and a suitcase, Vol de la valise (1971), whose documentation also captures Bizos legging it down a New York street. These works, strongly recalling early conceptual pieces by Joseph Kosuth, have three components: framed documentation of the action, the photographs of the thefts themselves and the actual item stolen. (Naughty.) With Vol du spot (1971) the joke is intensified by the fact that the nicked light illuminates the work. These purloined goods implicate both the gallery as ‘fence’ and any putative buyer as a receiver of stolen goods. Proudhon’s notion of all property being theft is thus cheekily and amusingly referenced by enfolding others in a criminal conspiracy. Bizos made these works in the aftermath of the protests in 1968 and the France of JeanLuc Godard’s La Chinoise (1967), with its cell of student Maoists. With Bye-Bye Mao (1976) Bizos charts the declining intellectual influence of Maoism in Paris – plus by extension the triumph of the moneyed bourgeoisie – by showing five posters illustrating the progressive degradation of the Great Helmsman’s image as it is ripped o¬ a hoarding from left to right. Bizos is clearly still something of an angry soixante-huitard. Mariane-Colère (2010), 48 photographic portraits of young women wearing blue or red Phrygian caps, refers to the republican symbol of Marianne. They frown or scowl, some bare their teeth; a few have their protective glass shattered. For Bizos the Fifth Republic is a conflicted place: the republican icon of the left has been appropriated by the gilets jaunes movement and even coopted by senior politicians into the ludicrous debate over whether burkinis were un-French. Art about crime and punishment: Bizos ups the stakes with the most surprising body of work here, which features one Jacques Mesrine. Not knowing anything about Mesrine before seeing Bizos’s pictures of a bloke making insolent ‘up yours’ gestures (Le Bras d’honneur, 1979), I took them to be a parody of macho silliness. Le Tir, Jacques Mesrine (triptych) (1979) depicts a figure reaching for his holster, removing his pistol, then pointing the barrel straight at your face. Another photograph, La Guillotine (1979), shows Mesrine’s head protruding from the bottom of a cardboard box, his eyes comically staring upwards – he’s playacting. And then the reveal, for those unfamiliar with French crime stories: Mesrine was the Ronnie Biggs of France, a Clyde Barrow type, an actual bank robber on the run. He took the piss out of the police and became something of a hero to Bizos and The People. You look again at those determined eyes as he aims that gun and realise that Mesrine had done this for real. In the year the last photo was taken, the police shot him 15 times in his gold BMW on the streets of Paris, an extrajudicial killing. He was forty-two. That decapitation picture was a prophetic gag. The press printed images of his slumped body, but this time it was no act.  Alain Bizos, Politically Incorrect, Polka Galerie, Paris, 15–25 January 2020
ArtReview℗Martha Atienza at Silverlens Gallery, Manila℗Carlos Quijon Jr℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗At the centre of Martha Atienza’s solo exhibition is a mechanism involving a tank of water (Equation of State II: Rhizophora stylosa, all works 2019). In it are a number of small aquarium fish; above it are a row of mangrove saplings hanging on a string. A system of automated weights and pulleys drops the mangroves into the water to moisten their roots, then draws the plants up again, evoking the life of mangroves as they are submerged in tidal waters. This exhibition, which includes new installation and video works, builds on Atienza’s interest in the relationship between humans and the ecologies in which we live. This time, the artist explores concerns of the climate crisis, particularly as it involves ecological decline and human resilience. Scientists have described some climate risks as ‘slow-onset events’ (sea-level rise, water-temperature rise, ocean acidification), and the exhibition’s slow, gradual flow recreates this condition to the point at which one wonders if this thematisation feels too deliberate and mediated. The unhurried pacing can be seen in the two videos in the show, which are titled after specific GPS locations and tide measures. In Panangatan…, a camera pans along the coast of Bantayan Island (the artist’s ancestral home) in Cebu, where the local community is vulnerable to rising seawaters and consequently receding coastlines. Capturing the lives of fisher-folk, formations of rocks and mangrove forests, the video contains minimal sound and action, except for a scene in which a child dives into the water. Life continues. A similar sense of persistence is evoked in the three-channel video Tarong/ Kaongkod…, showing a diver bobbing amid the waves of the sea. He dives deep, his chest visibly compressing, then rises above surface, chest expanding, as the human body mimics maritime waveform while both submitting to and overcoming the forces of nature. Also exploring the idea of endurance is arguably the most dramatic work of the show, Equation of State I, another plant bath that is mounted in a separate, darkened room. This time, only a single sapling is involved, and a single spotlight illuminates the plant and the pool of water. When the water is disturbed, shimmering reflections are thrown onto the wall. Because the plant is set higher and the interval between dippings longer, a sense of tension is created as the viewer waits for something to happen. On reflection, then, the darting fish in the first contraption, forced to respond to a recurring disruption, function as a foil to these tropes of endurance and passivity. Might they provide a way to reimagine how human agency asserts itself in times of crisis? Maybe we could cultivate a relation to crisis where we remain anxious but always responsive, and, in certain situations, animated and exuberant – like a flittering school of fish, alert to quivers of light or vibrations of movement.Martha Atienza: Equation of State at Silverlens, Manila, 7 December – 11 January 2020
ArtReview℗Sejin Kim at SongEun ArtSpace, Seoul℗Andy St. Louis℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Sejin Kim’s two-channel video installation Messenger(s) (all works 2019) centres on an unlikely protagonist: Laika the space dog, whose foray into Earth-orbit aboard Sputnik 2 in 1957 was predestined to end in fatality. As a subdued tribute to the countless living beings that have been sacrificed throughout history for the sake of ‘progress’, this work functions as a prologue to the exhibition. And by framing a tale of Soviet heroism in the context of a dog’s inability to give consent, Kim implicates authority figures throughout history whose desires to enact a ‘greater good’ were used to justify the slaughter of innocents. From there, Walk in the Sun invokes conditions of powerlessness and speculative claims to territory in real and virtual worlds across multiple timelines, probing inhumane assessments of ‘acceptable’ loss of life, systemic marginalisation and exploitation, and the prospect of global conflict in the not-so-distant future. Kim’s attention to the tenuous agency of society’s most vulnerable resonates in To the North for Nonexistence, which unfolds a first-person account of territorial dispossession experienced by the Sámi people, an indigenous minority who inhabit the Arctic territory of Sámi that stretches from Norway to Russia. Over the course of five visually distinct chapters, this single-channel video juxtaposes encyclopaedic information related to the history and culture of the Sámi and their ancestral homeland, along with reference photos and infographics. A nonlinear narrative component of the work situates the forced displacement of a contemporary Sámi woman by Swedish authorities within a larger trajectory of colonial encroachment and involuntary assimilation. Concluding the exhibition is a work that demonstrates Kim’s hybrid approach to storytelling by combining documentary-style production and speculative fictionalisation. 2048 considers the projected future for a virtual territory that serves as a not-so-subtle representation of Antarctica; CGI renderings of Antarctic landscapes, along with actual footage captured by Kim during her recent residency at South Korea’s Antarctic King Sejong Research Station, background a dystopian vision of the geopolitical outlook for our planet’s largest deterritorialised landmass. Set 30 years in the future, this three-channel video installation describes a geopolitical scramble for territory and resources among the world’s great powers after the expiration of the Antarctic Treaty, an international agreement prohibiting military and commercial activities on the continent. Kim’s use of an archival documentary mode of presentation – a forecast as historical fact – contends that such an uncertain future could have been prevented, if only a consensus had been reached to place peace and preservation before self-interest and greed. A deft integration of reality, fiction, archive and anecdote in Kim’s video oeuvre generates whys and wherefores that are inconclusive yet visceral; shifting notions of causality and temporality underscore a consistent call to action in defiance of traditional power structures. Regardless of nationality, viewers find themselves compelled to solemnly recognise the existential instability imposed upon large segments of society throughout history, and to reconsider the shared fate of all humanity in an increasingly hostile world. Sejin Kim: Walk in the Sun, SongEun ArtSpace, Seoul, 23 October – 30 November 2019
ArtReview℗Taloi Havini at Artspace, Sydney℗Micheal Do℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Focusing on the Australian-run Panguna mine – once the largest open-pit mine in the world – Reclamation burrows deep into the wounds of the Autonomous Region of Bougainville of Papua New Guinea and gives poetic form to the intersecting realities of Bougainvilleans as they seek to rebuild a society ravaged by mining interests. Those interests resulted in the displacement of thousands of refugees throughout Oceania, including Taloi Havini’s family. In this, her first Australian solo exhibition, the Bougainville-born, Sydney-based artist takes a less-is-more approach, exploring this history through a suite of eloquent and atmospheric works suffused with anguish and longing. Three wallpaper prints surround the gallery entrance: Copper mineral #1, detail. Habitat and Copper mineral #2, detail. Habitat (both 2018–19) are shots of copper ore leaching into azure water taken from her videowork Habitat (2018), while Bougainville District Map, Department of Direct Administration, October 1965 (2019) depicts a map of the boundaries of Bougainville Island that have been redrawn and relabelled by an Australian administration. Through these visual metaphors, Havini sets the symbolism of toxic copper contaminating a water supply beside the reshaping of the island’s geography to serve as an authoritative indictment of the resource imperialism Panguna has imposed on Bougainville’s environment and first nation systems of political and social organisation. In an adjoining room, the four-channel Habitat serves as a powerful elegy to people affected by the island’s civil war. Narrated by Bougainvillean community leader and activist Kuntamari Crofts, of the Barapang Matonaru Clan of South Nasioi, in her native tongue – one of 19 languages spoken on the island, and one also spoken by Havini – the video alternates between using all four channels to display vast scenes of the open-cut mine or wetlands, and showing archival footage of the civil war and Bougainvillean protests simultaneously on separate channels, setting up dynamic contrasts. Stitched together into a loose narrative, the scenes of lush scenery and violence tell of the years leading up to, and following, 1988, when the activities of Panguna occasioned a secessionist rebellion that swept across the region, resulting in over 15,000 deaths. Lingering shots of the terrain serve to illuminate a landscape seeded with tragedy, bitterness and destruction, revealing the disquieting truths that speak of Australia’s often violent and imperialist agenda in the Pacific. Havini has long collaborated with female members of her Hakö community, as a means by which to extend the matrilineal systems of political, social and cultural organisation that exist on the island. The newly commissioned Reclamation (2020), an installation steeped in the rhythms and traditions of Bougainville, embodies this modus operandi. The work comprises locally sourced palm and cane constructions – collaboratively shaped, often by four to five clan members working in groups, to embody different aspects of Hakö culture, from personal totems, to private cultural ceremonies, to indigenous musical instruments – arrayed across an undulating terrain of sandy earth. In intentionally echoing the inhospitable but strangely beautiful lands depicted in the video Habitat, Reclamation is devised as a counter to the colonial maps presented elsewhere in the exhibition, offering an indigenous means of surveying Bougainville culture and stretching Western concepts of time, space and representation. By recasting her understanding of indigenous Hakö culture and ancestral home, Havini’s works depict a society simultaneously traumatised by war yet filled with hope for its future. As Bougainville relishes the successful referendum for independence only months ago, Havini’s part-elegiac, part-polemic exhibition is a timely corrective to Australian history at large. Taloi Havini, Reclamation, Artspace, Sydney, 17 January – 23 February 2020
ArtReview℗Park Chan-kyong at Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, Seoul℗Andy St. Louis℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗In a world where conditions of crisis are increasingly seen as the new normal, art can offer opportunities for reflection on our changing reality and a means of comprehending catastrophe. Park Chan-kyong’s latest project gives viewers plenty to process, incorporating multiple mediums and modalities to propose a multivalent consideration of the value of community in trying times. While grounded in a rigorous conceptual framework (navigating notions of modernity, tradition, representation and historicisation), Gathering also delivers on an emotional level by moving beyond polemics of institutional critique and postcolonial discourse to contemplate how individuals in society cope in the aftermath of disaster. The result is an ambitious, compelling and occasionally unwieldy exhibition that probes the depths of this acclaimed photographer, filmmaker and critic’s meditations on community and crisis, conjuring a motif of duality as its unifying principle. On entry, visitors are funnelled through a visual archive of sorts, which serves as a test ground for alternative art histories and exhibition methodologies. In Small Museum of Art (all works 2019) Park imagines a museum structured to reflect its regional context and specific historical legacy, rather than acquiesce to the world-views perpetuated by archetypal Western art institutions. This mazelike installation comprises photographic reproductions of works by other artists, interspersed with a selection of reference images and sparse wall texts, articulating a loose network of indeterminate relationships between elements. Here, objects by conceptual artists Kim Beom and Chung Seoyoung are presented in dialogue with a largescale ink painting on folding screen by avant-garde modern artist Lee Ungno, while photos that document the construction of MMCA’s original flagship building during the 1980s appear beside images of traditional Korean mountain spirit shrines. Park’s unorthodox approach to installation schematics in Small Museum of Art reinforces a sense of scepticism towards institutionalised systems of display and reifies the contingent nature of Park’s proposed framework: unmounted photographs are fixed directly to the wall; texts and captions are handwritten in pencil. In this way, Park promotes the idea of the museum as a subjective frame of thought rather than a vehicle for predetermined or necessary ideologies. And that paradigm informs the rest of the works in the show. Emerging from this prelude, viewers encounter a configuration of discrete, nonsequential works by Park that form a robust platform for regarding contemporary concerns within an East Asian dialectic. At the heart of this constellation is Water Mark, a sculptural installation of 16 cement panels that seem to float parallel to the floor. Inscribed with stylised renderings of waves that reference Korean folk art, Japanese rock gardens and computer-simulated seascapes, these hardened, heavy masses project an uncanny sense of buoyancy. Crucially, for Korean audiences who gather around this symbolic body of water, the simultaneous presence and absence manifest in Water Mark induces inevitable associations with the sinking of the Sewol ferry, a national tragedy that claimed more than 300 lives in 2014. The shared sense of loss sparked by Park’s subtle monument to victims of this disaster elicits and reflects a collective solidarity among visitors in the exhibition space. This dynamic is echoed in a nearby photographic installation that examines the repercussions of national tragedy on an ecological level by visualising the unseen effects of radiation on a local environment. Fukushima, Autoradiography centres around images of plants, animals and objects collected from the Fukushima exclusion zone after the 2011 Daichi nuclear disaster. Presented in slideshow format, this work crosscuts photos of the lush Fukushima landscape with black-and-white autoradiographic images that reveal glowing, ghostlike masses of radiation harboured by an array of specimens. The stark contrast between these two sets of images creates an interstitial space of subjectivity between positive and negative, where the untethering of what is seen from what is known reminds viewers to think about which to trust, as well as of the potential for disaster within our contemporary energy infrastructure and beyond. Among a somewhat redundant assortment of the remaining works of photography, mixed-media installation and sculpture on view, Park’s new film Belated Bosal serves as the conceptual centre of the exhibition. A black-and-white photonegative effect suffuses this work with an otherworldly quality that inverts normal patterns of perception to envision a landscape in which the sun is black and shadows are white. The film unfolds slowly and deliberately against this disorienting background, incorporating dreams of previous lives and elements of magical realism in a vague narrative that follows two women as they separately traverse a rugged mountain landscape before jointly performing an unusual funeral rite. Both visually and thematically, a lingering sense of disaster pervades this quiet and slow-moving film, which at interludes makes mention of nuclear facilities and testing programs that adopt Buddhist nomenclature in semantic conflations of science and superstition. The film’s overtly Buddhist title simultaneously references a specific account of Siddhartha Gautama’s death, as well as the notion of pursuing a path towards enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. Belated Bosal draws heavily on Buddhist scripture for nearly all of its narrative elements, which combine with the haunting and surreal mountainous setting to situate the work in the discursive domain of Korea’s rich folk-religion traditions. By placing such classical indigenous ideologies in the context of crisis, this work permits viewers to question different types of gatherings, the manner of their formation and the objectives they seek to accomplish. Like the rest of the exhibition, Belated Bosal denies the possibility of a singular interpretation, favouring a pluralistic logic reflective of the relativism intrinsic to Eastern belief systems. MMCA Hyundai Motor Series 2019: Park Chan-kyong – Gathering, National Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art, Seoul, 26 October – 23 February 2020
ArtReview℗Biennale Jogja XV Equator: ‘Do we live in the same playground?’℗Kathleen Ditzig℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Do we live in the same playground? is an acid-laced provocation. It stings of the resentment accumulated through years of systematic marginalisation. Indeed, focusing on Indonesia in particular and Southeast Asia more generally, its curators – Akiq AW, Arham Rahman and Penwadee Nophaket Manont – use this rhetorical question to foreground the underprivileged and the forgotten through the work of 52 artists from the region. But unlike other exhibitions that address Southeast Asia as a spatial periphery of an international artworld, this one posits that ‘Southeast Asia’ as a geopolitical construct creates, in and of itself, other peripheries that require attention. In this context, ‘the periphery’ is not a place as much as it is the communities that live within the category of ‘Southeast Asia’ but don’t benefit from that construction, while still suffering from the histories of neoliberalism out of which Southeast Asia, as a regional trade zone and geographic entity, was created. Do we live in the same playground? is neither your typical international nor regional biennale. Yet, it is a biennale in all the ways that make biennales important discursive spaces and curatorial platforms. Presented across three main locations including Taman Budaya and Jogja National Museum, the exhibition privileges artworks that highlight lesser-known subjectivities as well as practices that are informed by long-term engagements with communities and lived experiences from the region. Bali-born Citra Sasmita’s Timur Merah Project: The Embrace of My Motherland (2019), for example, is an installation comprising suspended spice bags, text written in turmeric on the floor and scrolls that recall Kamasan paintings – a waning tradition of Balinese painting that illustrates canonical Javanese narratives such as the stories of Panji Malat, or the Indian epics of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana. Citra herself learned the form through meeting Mangku Murray, a Kamasan painter in Bali. Her installation reimagines the kakawin (a formal Javanese court literature fusing Hindu mythology and accounts of contemporary court life), originally written by male authors and articulating patriarchal rule, by shifting the attention to women as active protagonists in these stories.  Similarly, Yosep Arizal’s largescale installation Tanggalan Barohiwiyah (2019) appropriates a 15-day calendar system (taken from a Javanese divination manual found in the artist’s home) that instructs its (presumably male) reader on how to arouse a woman prior to sex. In Yosep’s version of the manual’s drawings, however, a man is the object of desire. These drawings are accompanied by a large, wall-mounted yonic sculpture that narrates the calendar to its viewers. Given the strict governance of public space in Indonesia, such a display would not be possible outside of the relatively liberal spaces of Yogyakarta. As such, the inclusion of works such as those by Yosep and Citra speaks not only to a feminist attempt to address the historical and societal obscuring of women, but also to the political potency of this biennale. The exhibition’s most poignant political gesture, however, is Moelyono’s Pembangunan Taman Monumen Marsinah (The Establishment of Marsinah Monument Park) (1993–2019), an homage to labour-activist Marsinah from Sidoarjo, East Java, who was raped and murdered on 8 May 1993. Taking the form of a monument housed in a space that emulates a public square, it includes a video, a commemorative plaque and make-shift wreath, images of Marsinah plastered on walls and a suspended body covered in a sack. Originally intended to be exhibited in Surabaya 20 years ago, it was censored due to its critique of Suharto’s brutal repression of labour protests. Marsinah’s killing, linked to her role as a representative for a workers’ protest at the Indonesian watch factory at which she worked, brought international criticism to bear on Suharto’s regime. Beyond the astute use of the exhibition as a space to address lacunae in mainstream discourse and history, the most rewarding aspect of the exhibition is its dedication to the difficult task of presenting artistic practice as a productive form of research and documentation. Gan Siong King’s Kecek Amplifier (2019) is historiography as a stylised video, interspersed with technical facts about synthesisers and jokes based on a conversation with Malaysian artist Nik Shazwan. Elsewhere, a room is dedicated to the exhibition of the late Roslisham Ismail’s final artwork (the Malaysian artist, also known as Ise, died this past July), Langkasuka: Journey Part One, which presents and unpacks the research and discussions he had undertaken with artists Chan Fei Meng and Imran Taib, exploring the culinary history of the Ancient Malay Kingdom Langkasuka that spanned Southern Thailand and the east coast of Malaysia, and is believed to have been founded during the second century. Building on this, the biennale particularly privileges new research based on direct engagement with communities and their lived experiences. For example, a commissioning programme (the Residensi Kelana programme) provided artists Ferial Afif, Tajriani Thalib and Ipeh Nur with the opportunity to study the rituals, belief systems, archives and oral traditions of different communities, in search of everything from forgotten Sumatran heroines to traditional rumah betang houses to the maritime lifestyles of the village of Pambusuang in West Sulawesi. The exhibition is at its strongest when it commits itself to the presentation of such practices and seeks to circumvent direct representations. But even when it does present artworks more concerned with a symbolic decolonisation of representation rather than an address to material realities, the curatorial gesture reverberates with political intent. The inclusion of Khairulddin Wahab’s Native Malay in Landscapes Apart from Painting (2014–), a series of self-portraits of the artist in traditional Malay attire against the backdrop of the rolling hills of the British countryside, is less interesting as a literal subversion of colonial photography than for the fact that Khairulddin is the only Malay Singaporean artist selected for this exhibition – speaking, perhaps, to the obscurity of the Malay minority in Singapore’s colonial and neocolonial histories. Do we live in the same playground? is a radical proposal for what a biennale can be and how curatorial gestures can be mobilised to move beyond the surface politics of representation. And in that respect, it is a strong case study for how the biennale format can still be a sandbox in which we all want to play. Biennale Jogja XV Equator: Do we live in the same playground?, various venues, Yogyakarta, 20 October – 30 November 2020
ArtReview℗Dumb Type at Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo℗Maki Nishida℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Founded by a group of friends at Kyoto City University of Arts in 1984, Dumb Type gained immediate critical acclaim for experimental live performances that melded digital design, music and performance. Many of its members past and present are influential artists in their own right, working in fields that range from the visual arts (Toru Koyamada, Tadasu Takamine, Shiro Takatani) to music (Toru Yamanaka and Ryoji Ikeda), to name a few. Teiji Furuhashi, an icon of 1980 and 90s media art, who died from an aids-related illness in 1995, was at the core of this nonhierarchical group’s formative first decade. This major retrospective, an expanded version of an exhibition hosted in 2018 at the Centre Pompidou-Metz, traces some 35 years of work and illustrates how epochal Dumb Type was, both in style and substance. The collective’s use of digital sound, electronic devices and industrial materials to create architectural installations is an aesthetic that can be seen in the work of a new crop of media-art protégés such as Rhizomatiks. Dumb Type’s subject matter – the ways in which society had become increasingly alienating, despite the promised benefits of new communication technologies, addressed in performances such as Pleasure Life (1988), or by the agonised strobe-lit bodies of dancers in s/n (1994) – also remains as relevant as ever. Curated by Yuko Hasegawa, the exhibition is a ‘best of’ showcase, bringing together six largescale installations, most of which are performerless, reworked versions of early sets and edited documentary videos of key live productions. These include a version of 1989’s Playback, an installation based on the performance Pleasure Life, featuring 18 metal stands, each with a turntable that plays a record featuring original and new sound materials – among them early Dumb Type compositions, the greetings in 55 languages sent into outer space on Nasa’s 1977 space probe Voyager, and new field recordings. Particularly striking is lovers (1994/2001), a poetic and poignant solo work by Furuhashi, made just before his death. Video projections of naked men and women run across and vanish from the walls. Motion sensors that pick up the presence of visitors prompt the appearance of a ghostly figure – Furuhashi – who embraces the viewer before disappearing. Given that most of the installations are recreations of historical live events, there is ample space for creative reconfiguration. For example, a 16m LED videowall combines scenes from Dumb Type’s last three performances, or (1997), memorandum (1999) and Voyage (2002), together with some newly shot materials. A concrete poem-like collage, the work transcends its nature as edited documentary footage. But other recomposed works are questionable. The final work of the show, for example, combines the 1994 video installation love / sex / death / money / life, now turned into a sleek LED videowall showing the words in large letters, with a reproduction of the stage set of pH (1990), comprising a truss bridge that is in constant motion, sweeping across the empty ‘performance area’. The resultant hybrid is visually strong yet conceptually puzzling – why combine two pieces from different phases from the group’s development? But it does raise important questions about the afterlife of live new-media performances: in what sense is there an ‘original’? And to what extent are modified versions or recut documentary recordings new works? For all of Dumb Type’s cutting-edge technical sophistry, love and longing for human connection were key themes in the group’s first decade under the informal leadership of Furuhashi. After he died, its concerns seem to have shifted towards the creation of new technical and formal aesthetics. But this development is not well articulated in the exhibition, given its mix-and-match approach to re-presenting works that treat Dumb Type’s oeuvre as a series of interchangeable units. To get a fuller and more accurate sense of the group’s evolution, one is better off perusing the modest section of the exhibition that showcases archival materials and short videos of the original performances themselves. Dumb Type, Actions + Reflections, Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo 16 November – 16 February 2020
ArtReview℗Lu Lei at Shanghart, Shanghai℗Fi Churchman℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗I’ve walked the wrong way through the installation. And by the wrong way, I mean off the designated path and into a sprawling mass of what looks like concrete-cast cannonballs and the broken pieces of some vast grey slab. The work, titled In the cold winter, the giants gather at the center of the square, playing marbles game with sand, according to the direction of the stars (all works 2019), is actually a clutter of planet-like spheres (148 of them), shooting meteors (complete with dust trails) and the broken bits of a constellation map, all moulded from greyish sand and resin. Some of the map’s pieces are embedded with planets, and we might imagine that ‘the giants’ have engaged in an overly enthusiastic marbles match, resulting in the destruction of the galaxy. Given that the sizes of the planet-marbles are somewhere between a big watermelon and a shotput, it’s as if the viewer is being situated as a cosmic-size giant (though not one who has played the game). I gingerly move out of the Milky Way. Beijing artist Lu Lei’s Wander Giant is arranged across three rooms, each titled as a ‘Chapter’. I’ve just left ‘Chapter 1: Game of the Giants’, which also presents a series of artificially rusted aluminium-cast models of factories with improbably tall chimneys titled In the summer night, the giants use bat catchers to attract bats, and are positioned around the edges of the room. What are these factories? Are they where the bat catchers are made? What is a bat catcher, and why do the bats need catching? In ‘Chapter 2: Reveries of the Giants’, more cast-aluminium sculptures: this time a pair of smooth grey busts, male and female, with giant glass lightbulbs for heads (W&amp;H Were Hit by Lightning), which are however unlit; and two oversize cochleae, complete with semicircular canals and a trumpet-shaped outlet, each perched on a packing crate (Long Live the Roar!). The latter, instantly putting the viewer on a microlevel, incites a feeling of long absence evoked by the ash-grey ossified appearance of the sculptures, and by the strange irony in the disconnect between the disembodied ear-parts and the lightbulb heads gone kerflooey. The last room (‘Chapter 3: The Giant Walking’) contains two concrete walls that curve either side of an aluminium Tatlin’s Tower-like water fountain. The Parentheses Corridor and Hand Washing Basins, rather than being an international powerhouse for the promotion of Communism, is a leaking minimonument set upon a low tiled platform. Thirty-two sets of plumbed-in taps circle their way up and around the tower, and dribble water down into the basin of the fountain. The dripping is the only sound that punctuates the room. According to the exhibition information, Lu Lei takes the shapes of these sculptures from his childhood imagination. And it turns out the artist’s given the exhibition a different title in Chinese – Absurd Fiction. As someone wise once said, ‘Meanings is not important… I cannot be right all the time. Quite often I is left instead of right.’ Lu Lei, Wander Giant, Shanghart, Shanghai, 6 November – 15 March 2020
ArtReview℗Neither Black/Red/Yellow Nor Woman at Times Art Center, Berlin℗Abhijan Toto℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Curated by Nikita Yingqian Cai, the Guangzhou Times Museum’s chief curator, and the Guggenheim Museum’s Xiaoyu Weng, Neither Black/Red/Yellow Nor Woman brings together works by 19 artists from Asia as well as Europe and Latin America. It is also the first major exhibition at the Times Art Center’s newly opened outpost in Berlin. Taking as a starting point a quote from Vietnamese theorist and filmmaker Trinh T. Minh-Ha, the show broadly works through forms of being and movement beyond narratives of origins or diaspora, and moves away from direct representations of Asia or Asianness. It offers instead a complex look at forms of itinerancy and belonging that are produced through such movement. The first work one encounters is art historian and researcher Mia Yu’s film essay A Journey from Silence (2017), documenting the archives of Pan Yuliang. A seminal figure in the histories of both Chinese and European modernisms, Pan, who during the 1930s achieved fame and a degree of notoriety for becoming the first Chinese woman artist to paint in a Western style, remains largely forgotten in both contexts, despite having spent most of her life in Paris, where she also taught. Yu’s hands place photographs and archival materials on a table as she narrates a nonlinear presentation of Pan’s life and her own archival investigations. She lays the objects out like tarot cards, conjuring Yuliang’s spirit, and through this idiosyncratic recitation, she challenges the canon of both Western and Chinese art histories. Yu asks how monolithic visions of nation and identity have occluded the complexity of relations that a figure like Yuliang embodied. Shen Xin’s video installation Warm Spell (2018) alludes to the magical and the sensuous. Shot on the island of Koh Yao Yai in Thailand, the work weaves together fictional and real interviews, looking at the complex entanglement between queer bodies, spirits, economies, race and movement, juxtaposing the figure of the migrant, the expat and the tourist. Moving fluidly between awkwardly staged fiction, documentary and mythical forms of storytelling, the artist collapses distinctions between local and nonlocal to dramatise the social production of place. One of the most interesting constellations in the show is between Copenhagen-based Jane Jin Kaisen’s Apertures/Specters/Rifts (2016), French-Colombian artist Laura Huertas Millán’s jeny303 (2018) and Bangkok-based Arin Rungjang’s Gossamer Rungjang ‘Mother’ (2014), for the way they examine microhistories in the context of grand narratives and complicate ideas of agency beyond narratives of victimhood. Kaisen’s blood-red lightbox interweaves a pair of narratives concerning journeys to North Korea: her own, in May 2015, and that of Danish journalist Kate Fleron in May 1951, at the height of the Korean War. Kaisen intersperses Fleron’s images with her own, blurring the lines between historical truth and the imagination of a place. In Rungjang’s two-channel videowork, one screen dwells on the resting body of his mother, while a second screen narrates her story following his father’s death due to injuries inflicted by neo-Nazis during a business trip to Hamburg in 1977, their juxtaposition speaking to resilience in the face of unforeseen and obscured violence. Huertas Millán’s work interlaces footage from Bogotá’s now-disappeared brutalist icon edificio 303, once a hotspot of activism, with a conversation with Jeny, a queer person who talks casually about their delinquency and criminal activities. Through these, and works by Thao Nguyen Phan, Mai Ling, Evelyn Taocheng Wang and others, the show charts a course that looks beyond particular frameworks of identity politics and narratives of victimhood, while acknowledging continued pain and oppression, and offers instead a more refreshingly nuanced position. Neither Black/Red/Yellow Nor Woman, Times Art Center, Berlin, 28 September – 11 January 2020
ArtReview℗Sarah Abu Abdallah at Jameel Arts Centre, Dubai℗Rahel Aima℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗It turns out that everything happens in ‘da salad zone’. A woman sits inside a giant metal stockpot and uses her hands to drag-twirl herself across a cerulean-carpeted floor, as if she were on a spinning-teacup ride at a funfair; later she stumbles around with the pot on her head. And even though she is filmed through a partially open door, the feeling is more stylised than voyeuristic: get a good shot of me doing this. Later on, schoolgirls fantasise about Japan as the camera tracks a spider across a terrazzo floor. A family bickers about lapsed vegetarianism while a cockroach scuttles across tiles. Cars slosh through a flooded road. Everyone is so stubborn and so bored. The video The Salad Zone (2013) is one of a sparsely hung assortment of five works from the last six years by Sarah Abu Abdallah. The Saudi artist gained attention in 2011 with Saudi Automobile, in which she painted a wrecked SUV baby-pink – a comment on her country’s then-ban on women driving – and is known for her irreverent, slice-of-life videos. Here the video is shown alongside a friezelike painting in one large museum gallery, with a multichannel video installation that dominates another darkened room. And in a third, sunnily windowed space, a drawing and some live plants. The selection mirrors the casual, vloggy feel of the videos, where you half-expect the artist to pop up saying, “Make sure you click the link below to subscribe!” Somehow, it all works. In The House That Ate Them Whole (2018), the dwelling in question gets so bored that it makes a meal out of its residents. The story unfolds over three screens – one on each wall, surrounding the viewer – through lurchy, spinning cinematography, talking-head-style witness testimony and sung narration, all of which contribute to a pervasive sense of audiovisual claustrophobia. Warbled lines like “destruction can be slow and unnoticed” and “it is important to eat” seem to fix the house as a metaphor for the insatiable appetite of urban development. This anxiety becomes more explicit in an installation of raised soil-beds planted with tomato vines in the next room. The seedlings are an heirloom variety Abu Abdullah remembers from her childhood, the farming of which has all but disappeared as oil extraction and unchecked urbanisation encroach upon the farmlands that once surrounded her hometown of Qatif. Its title, Trees Speaking with Each Other (2019), suggests that the trees are logging onto mycorrhizal networks or the ‘internet’ of fungi that plants use to communicate with each other. Perhaps this is just a way of describing how our brains have mutated on the internet. In Abu Abdallah’s work, images and references aren’t mixed so much as made to duke it out with pool noodles, to entertaining effect. The first gallery is dominated by Bad Hunches (2019), a 23m-long painting hung from the ceiling that snakes through the space like a ribbon worm. Patchy, dieselly sloshes of black that suggest a topography of extreme scale – either a satellite view of the earth or a cellular-level map – are collaged over with printed-and-cutout images melding personal snapshots (a kid on a tricycle, gahwa cups and tarot cards, a hand flexed to show off some nail art) with assorted digital flotsam (a medical diagram of a torso, house facades, an embarrassment of tomatoes), portents of the other works in the show. Those scenes of domesticity in Salad Zone are meanwhile intercut with a pair of niqabis methodically smashing a TV using garden implements – vengeful tomato farmers perhaps? When they’re done, they turn towards the camera with no small satisfaction and stand, inverted shovel in hand like a Grant Wood painting transposed to eastern Saudi Arabia. Standing at the precipice of change and wary of being wholly consumed, a Khaleeji Gothic. Sarah Abu Abdallah, For the First Time in a Long Time, Jameel Arts Centre, Dubai, 17 December – 20 April 2020
ArtReview℗Wansolwara: One Salt Water at UNSW Galleries and 4A Centre for Contemporary Art, Sydney℗Neha Kale℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Wansolwara, a pidgin word from the Solomon Islands that loosely translates as ‘one ocean, one people’, is an ambitious exhibition that spans two institutions and features work by 20 contemporary artists with ties to Oceania and the Pacific. But Wansolwara rejects the ideas of geographical categories defined by generations of colonial explorers – and now the cavalcade of tourists, wearing plastic leis, that tumble daily off hulking cruise ships. Instead, it revolves around the idea of a single continuous waterscape that knits distinct communities in a shared kinship. In doing so, in the context of a year that marks the 250th anniversary of Captain Cook’s voyage to Australia, it refuses the terms of modern-day geopolitics – and imagines, in its wake, a different kind of future. A woman lies facedown, arms outstretched, back illuminated by a chandelier. She adjusts her body slightly, as if trying to make herself more comfortable. She turns her head, locks eyes with the viewer. Around her, palm fronds glisten, quivering with secret energy. This scene is charged, alive with hidden meanings. But you are left in the dark. Dark Light (2017), a videowork by Samoan artist Angela Tiatia, hangs in the front room of Sydney’s UNSW Galleries. The work refers to a famous image: Max Dupain’s Sunbaker, a 1937 portrayal of suntanned leisure that’s come to stand in for all the breezy freedoms of Anglo- Australian life. But in the presence of the more recent work, I am reminded of something else – Paul Gauguin’s 1892 portrayal of his young Tahitian mistress: Spirit of the Dead Watching (Manao Tupapau). His subject lies flat on her stomach, hand concealing her face, presenting Oceania as sensual and mysterious, an extension of the artist’s basest desires. Tiatia’s work, too, is sensual and mysterious. But the mysteries are those that arise from wrestling with your own subjectivity, of acknowledging how you’ve been shaped by who is watching you and summoning the courage to watch back. On the first floor, a minisurvey of work by twice-removed Fijian-Indian Australian artist Shivanjani Lal centres around Yaad Karo (1879–1920) (2019). Across this series of maps, lifted from a 1980s school atlas, the artist hand-stitches the route free ships once took across the Pacific. Alongside this, she sews the path taken by her ancestors, part of the Girmitiya, the community of Indians who, under British rule, were transported to Fiji to work on sugar-cane plantations as indentured labour (thus replacing outlawed slave labour, allowing Fijians to preserve their culture, and ensuring revenue for European settlers). In Hindu culture, crossing the ocean – the kala pani, or black waters – was taboo, dissolving links to caste and kinship. Lal’s stitches, done in red thread, the threads often loose and fraying, grow increasingly assertive. At some points, the maps, which centre around Australia, itself complicit in the same colonial systems, appear to drip with blood. To stitch is an act of repair. But it can also suture. And to heal a wound, you have to acknowledge it first. Slavery, of course, occurred across the British Empire, everywhere from British Ceylon to Jamaica and Barbados. So many former British colonies, scattered throughout the Great Ocean, are still grappling with the legacy today. The idea ‘one ocean, one people’ doesn’t just refer to the past or the future. It also recalls a shared sense of historical struggle. Although Wansolwara highlights these specific tensions, it leaves the viewer to do the work of finding resonances between different post-colonial realities. And given the buried nature of many of these narratives, this feels a little like a missed opportunity. A centrepiece of Wansolwara is ‘O le ūa na fua mai Manu‘a’, a series of moving-image works curated by Léuli Eshrāghi, a Montreal and Darwin-based Sāmoan curator with Persian ancestry. Taking its title from a Sāmoan proverb that references the relief that greets long-awaited rain, this part of the show debunks Western modes of seeing and knowing. For instance, the 2016 videowork Creatura Dada, by the Anishinaabe French artist Caroline Monnet, inserts native female artists into Dadaism’s origin story. But the magic, for me, was about seeing First Nations women – such as director Alanis Obomsawin and artist Nadia Myre – devour grapes, slurp oysters and impale lobsters, lost in the realm of the sensorial, seizing the pleasure that Dali and Duchamp took for granted. Elsewhere, Bundjulung and Ngāpuhi choreographer Amrita Hepi’s A Body of Work (At the End of the Earth) (2017), in which dancers writhe and twist on clifftops, is a love letter to her collaborators, to constellations of care that transcend oceans. Like the figure in Dark Light, who shares these dancers’ unashamed sensuality, the human body is inseparable from the social body. It moves, speaks and resists. And it finds solace in other people. This is also the case for Gurrutu‘mi Mala – My Connections (2019), a spellbinding video by Gutiŋarra Yunupiŋu, a twenty-one-year- old Yolngu filmmaker with hearing loss. Like all Yolngu children, Yunupiŋu, from East Arnhem Land in Australia’s Northern Territory, was taught Yolngu Sign Language, a now-endangered ritual dialect. In the work, the image of the artist appears ten times. Each version performs a sign, drums in the background recalling heartbeats, lifeforce. Words might elude him, but his connection to his ancient language means that he can still speak clearly to those who can understand. The works in Wansolwara are rooted in the specific. But they also rail against the scourge of authenticity. ‘There are no true interpreters or sacred guardians of any culture,’ the great Samoan poet Albert Wendt wrote in his famous 1976 essay ‘Towards A New Oceania’. The exhibition takes this edict seriously, mining unlikely connections between people and finding lineage between places we don’t expect. On the ground floor of 4A is Auckland artist Rebecca Ann Hobbs’s South (2010–11), a series of videoworks that see members of South Auckland’s Pacific Islander community dance on bridges, in industrial spaces and in shopping malls. They borrow their moves from vogue and dancehall, forms conceived in 1980s Harlem and 1970s Kingston that have crossed the Great Ocean and jumped time and space to give voice to the struggles faced by Pacific Islanders decades into the future. The dancers strut, pop and roll, their movements electric and deliberate. Bodies can be misunderstood, underestimated. But they can also use old language to create new spaces and dream up new ways to be free in the process. Wansolwara: One Salt Water, UNSW Galleries and 4A Centre for Contemporary Art, Sydney, 17 January – 29 March 2020
ArtReview℗Zhang Yunyao at Qiao Space, Shanghai℗Julie Chun℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Entering this exhibition of paintings by Zhang Yunyao is a confounding experience. The Shanghai-based artist offers viewers a visual assault of classical Greek and Roman forms, which have little context in his homeland – particularly for general audiences who may not be aware that such forms provided a model for socialist-realism productions that dominated Chinese art during the period of the Cultural Revolution (1966–76). As you move from one enormous panel to the next, Zhang’s figures materialise in hyperrealist glory, hand-rendered not in oil on canvas but rather graphite on felt, an unconventional medium that has engrossed the artist since 2011 for its challenging tendency to smudge and soil. An overwhelming sense of disquietude pervades each of the 16 canvases hung in the main gallery, since very few, if any, of Zhang’s depictions can be easily traced to exact sculptural prototypes. He has bastardised his portrayals of eminent gods, goddesses and emperors with aggressive marks of overdrawing and fractured compositions, as if his painted sculptures are at the point of implosion. The valiant Perseus holding aloft the head of Medusa in Study in Figures (avidatia) (2017) is himself decapitated and fragmented in layers in Zhang’s interpretation of the iconic form. The fierce gesture of Heracles as he fights a lion with his bare hands in Release (2018) and of men abducting a resisting Sabine woman in Study in Figures (2019) signify a declaration of penultimate perfection in their nude naturalism, as if chiselled like marble statues. Zhang’s use of archetypes from Western antiquity exemplifies the ways in which ideal paradigms can be appropriated as symbols of authority as evinced by the passage of forms since the civilisation of the Greeks, the Romans and the Renaissance, and their revival for neoclassical creation of a nation by the United States’ forefathers as well as by the Soviet and Chinese Communist regimes. While embodying the ethos of classical ideals, Zhang’s paintings also direct our gaze to the transgressive nature of subjugation that often accompanies acts of domination. Most poignantly, as revealed in Release, the masculine virility of Heracles, for example, stands against a background of draped flaccid forms. Notwithstanding acts of aggression evinced through the deployment of terror or force, Zhang seems to suggest that even the most Herculean power cannot sustain its erection. Zhang Yunyao, Palace of Extasy at Qiao Space, Shanghai 10 October – 12 January 2020
ArtReview℗State of Motion: Rushes of Time at National Archives of Singapore and 20 Depot Road, Singapore℗Adeline Chia℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Off the coast of Narathiwat Province, southern Thailand, is an artificial reef made out of military tanks originally used during 1980s border disputes with Communist Cambodia. Tada Hengsapkul’s two-screen video installation You lead me down, to the ocean (2018) shows one such tank in its watery retirement grounds. Surrounded by schools of fish, it appears to be the environmentally friendly poster-boy for demilitarisation. But text projected on the other screen suggests a more complicated version of Thailand’s Cold War legacies. The words are drawn from letters exchanged between a Thai soldier and his wife during the Vietnam War, chronicling personal experiences of a war that would have lasting effects on Thai politics. Although the power of the Thai junta is pretty much taken as given now, it actually rose to power during the little-known us-backed Thai involvement in the Vietnam War. In this context, Hengsapkul’s work takes on more sinister connotations, evoking submerged histories that are still exerting a malign influence on the country’s fortunes. The complex interactions of personal memories and collective histories, and their lingering impact on the present, are some of the themes explored in Rushes of Time, this year’s edition of the Asian Film Archive’s annual exhibition series State of Motion. Put together by three guest curators, Cheong Kah Kit, Selene Yap and Tan Guo-Liang, the show aims to ‘reflect on the relations between ideas of time, bodies of memory and the moving image’ – vague enough to encompass a mixed bag of ten works. The show is spread out over two venues, the National Archives of Singapore and a rickety warehouse space in Depot Lane. The National Archives section explores the idea of a repository, with an open-studio presentation by artist Koh Nguang How on Singapore’s history of performance art, for example. Over at the warehouse space is where the curating opens up to a looser interpretation of the archival theme, such as Pat Toh’s Topography of Breath (2020), featuring 156 full-length self-portraits after an injury, showing the body as site of memory and trauma. The commonsense understanding of an archive is that it speaks for the past, but a number of artworks here disrupt this convention. The results are abstract works detached from the worldly facts and meanings with which they were once associated. In Edit, cuttings (2018), Sonya Lacey washes the ink from newspapers, dyes them, then cuts and arranges them into rectangular prints with pale washes of colour. Presented flat on tables, some prints resemble the veined, granular surfaces of marble, others washi paper collages. For Halberd Head… (2008), Sriwhana Spong filmed a Javanese spearhead in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which has a no-video policy, using a pinhole camera fitted with Super-8 film. She then superimposed colour filters created by the influential Italian cinematographer Vittorio Storaro, who was a fan of Goethe’s theories on colour. Spong’s film is filled with moving orbs, pretty flares of light and no specific detail. In both works, materials that are tasked to speak (newspaper, documentary film, museum artefact with postcolonial history) become recalcitrant, and information is turned into mood. One could read these works as forms of strategic, even defiant, mutisms. But given the considerable amount of labour expended for these projects, it is a shame that their hard-earned silences are anodyne rather than thought-provoking. State of Motion: Rushes of Time at National Archives of Singapore and 20 Depot Road, Singapore, 10 January – 2 February 2020
ArtReview℗Rosa Barba at Parra &amp; Romero, Madrid℗George Stolz℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Roughly halfway through Rosa Barba’s Aggregate States of Matter (2019) – the stunning film installation that forms this show’s centrepiece – is a centrally framed shot of a woman. It’s a spare, almost classical portrait: a three-quarters, head-and-shoulders pose, set against the vast Peruvian altiplano, or Andean Plateau, which lies below and beyond. As the camera circles to address her face-on, she raises her eyes and looks impassively into its lens while the wind lifts wisps of her hair. The slight creases in the skin of her face find echoes in the folds of the terrain beyond, so that she seems not only to be in front of but also within and even of the landscape itself. And the film then moves on. In keeping with the film’s deft, almost dreamlike structuring, no information is offered regarding who this woman is or why she is portrayed with such tender immediacy. External sources tell us, however, that she served as translator between Barba and the local Quechua people during the film’s onsite production. Thus her presence in the film, while brief, might be seen as emblematising the essential role of translation in the works here and in Barba’s transdisciplinary practice in general; an expanded kind of translational process, less concerned with relaying content itself from one artistic format to another than with capturing, assimilating and ultimately revealing, often in an indirect fashion, the shape-giving impulses below the surface of such content. Aggregate States of Matter is a 20-minute study of a remote section of the Peruvian Andes, from Lake Titicaca to the peaks of the Cordillera Blanca. It is decidedly not a conventional documentary – it is far too elliptical and nonnarrative for that – yet neither is it inaccessible. To the contrary: the film’s layering of images and voices of the Quechua people, intimacy with its human subjects, breathtaking aerial footage and overarching gentle simplicity are as seductive as they are hypnotic. In the process, Barba succeeds, with remarkable efficiency, in conveying (ie translating to film) a sense of the land, the life it supports and the people who inhabit it; she also conveys, with equal economy, the terrifying changes affecting all of these as the mountain glaciers melt and retreat. (“Cambio climático”, or climate change in Spanish, can be discerned within the film’s recorded conversations, which otherwise take place in Quechua.) What is revealed is all the more powerful for being revealed obliquely, without stridency, as something that is, again, not only in but of the landscape itself. Formally distinct yet sharing a certain methodological approach, another work in the exhibition – Liberties (2020) – consists of a pair of undulating wall-hanging sculptures cast in wax (the show also included language-based prints reminiscent of concrete poetry, a sound installation and a small librarylike installation of Barba’s books and artworks by her colleagues.) Within Liberties, small wax letters seem to emerge and flow downward, as if unfurling; at the same time, the densely textural work is reminiscent of organic material, of a geological eruption and crumbling (not unlike the glacier in the nearby film). This morass of words is drawn directly from Susan Howe’s 1980 poem ‘The Liberties’, so that what is at work is a kind of ekphrasis, a re-expression of a given artwork in a different medium. But here the shift is not from visual into verbal form but from the verbal to the sculptural. And more crucially, Barba’s reworking of Howe’s poem is utterly removed from an impulse towards illustration or even interpretation, but rather pushes – outwardly, sculpturally – towards something generative in its own right, like a seismic outcropping in a landscape of language.  Rosa Barba, Turn and Wind, Parra &amp; Romero, Madrid, 26 February – 4 April 2020
ArtReview℗Pacita Abad at Spike Island, Bristol℗Skye Sherwin℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗In the short documentary Wild at Art (1995) the late painter Pacita Abad explains how she was once detained in Hawaii, suspected – because she was from the Philippines – of travelling with a fake passport. This brush with systemic prejudice led to her series Immigrant Experience (the works shown here are dated 1991–94), huge quilted canvases painted and embossed with embroidered forms using the ‘trapunto’ technique. They occupy over half her exhibition at Spike Island, where they hang, flaglike, from the ceiling. But this isn’t a fight-the-power protest art the story might suggest. Rather Abad filtered what she learned from fellow immigrants from places as diverse as Cambodia and Korea in works of colour-saturated affirmation. We’re shown people’s day-to-day challenges and aspirations: at work, negotiating the school system, getting married or shopping for groceries. America’s land of plenty is evoked in glowing street signs and trolleys brimming with branded goods. These are rendered with all the vibrant appeal of the flora and fauna, costumes and traditions from beyond the US that also feature in these works. Though Abad studied art in Washington, DC, it was the traditions of the countries she travelled to in Asia, Africa and Latin America she related to most. Her paintings incorporate everything from batik to macramé, mirror embellishments and ink drawing. Each surface is intensely worked with dots and dashes of pigment and stitching, sewn-on shells, sequins and beads, real clothes and cutup dyed fabric, and the abstract trapunto paintings that occupy the rest of the gallery are a kaleidoscope of this technical cosmopolitanism: an early work composed of swirling, dripping organic shapes is inspired by the peeling walls of her home country’s capital, Manila. The series Oriental Abstractions (1984–92) uses Korean ink-brush painting as a starting point for screen-printed, mosaiclike constellations of crescent moons elaborated with dots, latticework and zigzags. Trippy titles like Liquid Experience (1985), a work in which hot red mountainous forms recall Japanese landscape painting, suggest the San Francisco counterculture scene that, having fled Ferdinand Marcos’s dictatorship during the 1970s, first nurtured her creative sensibility. Though her work was not unknown in the US, Abad worked largely outside the Western artworld, making and showing paintings in the countries she visited. She was invested in a broad and local audience (creating public artworks like her 2004 covering of Singapore’s Alkaff Bridge in multicoloured patterns) and favoured unconventional methods of distribution (decorating dresses and even a dinner set). But with the recent drive to address art history’s predominantly white, male and Western-centric blind spots, and a resurgent interest in fibre art, her paintings have lately gained exposure, with major museum acquisitions, a survey in Manila and inclusion in international art fairs. Dubbing herself a ‘woman of colour’ with cheerful double entendre, she approached identity in a manner distinct from the nuance of today’s debates. Yet her sense of globalist empathy speaks enthusiastically to our own, particularly in this fraught moment, when borders are closing. What rescues her project from exoticism is how Abad approaches her material as a fellow outsider, keen to give other overlooked people and creative traditions a platform through her painting. Her labour-intensive process, the works’ size and their installation – here, hung from the gallery’s lofty ceilings – all emphasise that this is a project of everyday monumentalism. The effect is especially striking in L.A. Liberty (1992), in which a brown-skinned Statue of Liberty poses triumphantly in an intricately decorated patchwork dress against a rainbow sunburst. She’s ‘a woman of colour’ in every sense and, like all of Abad’s work, an exuberant banner for multiculturalism before the term became a staple of artists’ discourse. Pacita Abad, Life in the Margins, Spike Island, Bristol, 18 January – 5 April 2020
ArtReview℗Masculinities: Liberation through Photography at Barbican Art Gallery, London℗Oliver Basciano℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗A photographic survey of maleness that’s too much queer eye and not enough straight guy℗This survey exhibition is a feast for the eyes, particularly if your eyes are partial to feasting on fit men. Featuring over 300 photographs and films, both editorial and art, by more than 50 artists, the exhibition seeks to survey how masculinity has been represented from the 1960s to the present. The beauty pageant begins in military fatigues: Adi Nes’s Soldiers series (1994–2000) features youthful Israeli servicemen, seemingly caught by an embedded photographer. A narrative of barely concealed mutual homoerotic desire runs through the body language of these subjects, all unnaturally handsome. One photograph shows four of the military men peeing in a line; in another a guy is caught snoozing on an army transport bus, the lens trained on his thick, muscular neck. In a khaki tent, a soldier lying on his side, the bare soles of his feet exposed to the lens, stares across at a brother-in-arms who is messing around with a candle, dripping wax on his hand. Nes’s photos are, in fact, entirely staged. So too the rough Lebanese streetfighters shown posing and flexing on Beirut’s ruined streets in Fouad Elkoury’s series Militiamen: Portrait of a Fighter, Beirut (1980). The men, though real soldiers, are, we’re informed via a gallery caption (it’s not obvious from the photos themselves), taking part in a film. These images of the man’s ur-role – fighter and protector – provide an introduction to an exhibition that seeks, so the curatorial blurb says, to explore ‘the diverse ways masculinity has been experienced, performed, coded and socially constructed’. The problem is, as the show progresses, that diversity is not really evident. Instead what we get is an exhibition of queer erotics, almost entirely dated to the twentieth century. No bad thing in itself – there is some fantastic work here – but by approaching masculinity through this narrow gaze, the exhibition has little work addressing the toxicity of patriarchy, or the social change engendered by the #MeToo movement, both of which are reference points claimed by the curators. Barely a handful of works tackle the patriarchal order at its most potent (and potently awful). Karen Knorr’s Gentlemen (1981–83), picturing members of London’s private clubs, their privilege evident in body language as much as the stately interiors, is a rare exception. Likewise Richard Avedon’s The Family (1976), a grid of 69 portraits of America’s political, military and media establishment, almost all white and male; but these works, in this context (The Family was originally commissioned by Rolling Stone to mark the country’s bicentennial, during the first post-Watergate American presidential campaign), do little to move the conversation beyond identifying the privileged demographic. Better in this regard, and notable in that it is one of the most recent works on show, is Andrew Moisey’s The American Fraternity: An Illustrated Ritual Manual (2018), which documents jocks indulging in not-always-innocent hijinks. The works originally appeared as a photobook and were accompanied by an essay – not on show here – by Nicholas L. Syrett, an academic in gender studies, who notes that the activities depicted, ‘such as excessive drinking, hazing and womanising, can all be seen as trying to make ourselves a more masculine man’. More such interrogative insight into the insecurity of heterosexuality would have been a welcome addition to the show (recent moving-image work by artists such as Ed Atkins, Andrea Bowers and even Jordan Wolfson spring to mind). The straight world is again addressed in a section of the exhibition dedicated to the family, but with works such as Duane Michal’s Grandpa Goes to Heaven (1989), Masahisa Fukase’s touching Memories of Father (1971–90) and Larry Sultan’s Pictures from Home (1984–92) – the last featuring Sultan’s father in his retirement village (practising his golf swing, vacuum-cleaning in his socks) – the curating here concentrates on the vulnerability of old age. Otherwise the exhibition cycles through homoerotic tropes, including the sportsman (Catherine Opie’s pictures of American high school football players, be they floppy-haired twink Devin, his hand resting on his groin, or Stephen, his toned midriff showing beneath a tiny Superman T-shirt); the bodybuilder (Robert Mapplethorpe’s photos of Arnold Schwarzenegger – all abs and oil – or Herb Ritts’s pictures of a muscled guy lifting tyres); and the cowboy (Isaac Julien’s steamy After Mazatlán, 1999/2000). All these images fall under the rubric of gay fantasies of hypermasculinity. Other galleries are dedicated to images of effeminate but no less highly sexualised men. A 1970 photo by Karlheinz Weinberger shows a long-haired dandyish type naked but for a long fur coat, his cock as thick as a cola can. Just as camp is another studio photograph by the Swiss artist in which a different model wears nothing but a straw boater and the tiniest of tiny denim shorts, the fly teasingly unzipped. The viewer peruses these pics, as well as Peter Hujar’s 1982 images of the ethereally beautiful drag performer David Brintzenhofe, soundtracked by The Paris Sisters’ 1965 version of Dream Lover, its perky doo-wop sound-spilling from Kenneth Anger’s three-minute film Kustom Kar Kommandos, made that same year. A young man, tanned, blond hair Brylcreemed back, polishes an evidently beloved hot-rod. Some wall space is reserved for other groups outside the dominant white Western heteronormative power structure, though these too tend to intersect with queer identity. An outing for Isaac Julien’s Looking for Langston (1989) is always welcome, the 45-minute film telling the story of black gay identity via an uptown Manhattan speakeasy, segueing between the 1920s of the Harlem Renaissance and the 1980s disco scene. One character wrestles with his twin desires to “hunt dark meat in Harlem” and for “being loved”, a tension between sex and emotional connection also palpable in the quotes attached to Sunil Gupta’s photographs of gay men in New Delhi. While India’s social conservatism during the 1980s was no barrier to guys copping off in the ‘party and park scene’, it severely limited the chances of a committed relationship. Photographed with none of the exhibitionism of the European and American subjects, turning away to protect his identity, a man named Jangpura is quoted as bemoaning ‘being alone with no prospect of meeting anyone’. Most illuminating however is a small selection of work by female artists examining the female experience of masculinity, not least Laurie Anderson’s Fully Automated Nikon (1973), photographs of men who harassed the artist in the street; and the voyeuristic pairing of Annette Messager’s The Approaches (1972), sneak pics of men’s groins, and Tracey Moffat’s Heaven (1997), snatched footage of male surfers changing, a welcome promotion of straight female erotic desire. Yet this lens on heterosexuality is all too brief; while art history has long been written by straight white guys, the urgent work is not to ignore them in exhibitions such as this, or exclusively to consider masculinity through a queer gaze. Instead the camera needs turning round to allow moments of self-interrogation. Masculinities: Liberation through Photography, Barbican Art Gallery, London, 20 February – 17 May 2020
ArtReview℗‘Spectrosynthesis II – Exposure of Tolerance’: LGBTQ in Southeast Asia at Bangkok Art and Culture Centre℗Mark Rappolt℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗What’s the purpose of art exhibitions? What, if anything, do we expect them to do in the current time? These, and questions like them, are ones that plough through your mind when you leave Spectrosynthesis II. ‘Plough through’ in a good way. Spectrosynthesis II is the second iteration of a touring exhibition based around the collection of LGBTQ art currently being amassed by the Sunpride Foundation (a Hong Kong-based private organisation led by Patrick Sun). The first, featuring work by 22 artists, took place at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Taipei, in 2017, shortly after a Constitutional Court ruling paved the way for Taiwan to become, two years later, the first Asian country to legalise same-sex marriage. The current exhibition features work by more than 50 artists and takes place in a country in which same-sex sexual activity is legal (while Spectrosynthesis was on show in Taipei, Bangkok was named the second most gay-friendly city in Asia, after Tel Aviv), but in which same-sex couples and households are not accorded the same legal protections as opposite-sex couples (legislation regarding civil partnerships is currently being discussed in parliament), and change of legal gender is not recognised. Both the Museum of Contemporary Art, Taipei and the Bangkok Art and Culture Centre (BACC) are government-run institutions. Context is important here, because Spectrosynthesis II, like its predecessor, is a show that attempts to balance an awareness-raising intent with a more traditional framing as a display of works of artistic and art-historical merit. Ultimately, while there’s no doubt that the message of tolerance and acceptance is shouted out loud (in no small part as a result of the differences in geopolitical context in which the artworks were created), you enter wondering whether or not the LGBTQ theme of the exhibition will narrow the frame for the interpretation of individual artworks. The exhibition opening was certainly marked by a celebratory mood, with a carnivalesque drag performance (worthy of one of Bangkok’s celebrated queer nightclubs) by the Dicklomacy Queers Spicey(est) Sisters (Ming Wong, Bradd, Radha, Tamarra, Josh Serafin and Amadiva), titled Land of a Thousand Rainbows (2019), that paraded through the crowded walkways of the BACC’s main atrium, ending on a stage at the entrance to the exhibition with (naturally) a pumped-up rendition of I Will Survive. But within the context of the mixed bag of works that make up the exhibition itself, it is those which allow a darker mood to enter that shine. In this vein, Thai photographer Ohm Phanphiroj’s short videowork Underage (2010), which surveys the lives of eight male child sexworkers (the youngest only eleven years old) in Thailand, particularly stands out. Phanphiroj’s subjects talk to camera while viewed in a car wingmirror, in one of its seats or in nighttime streets and alleyways, about their dreams of going to America, about having a boyfriend or about their girlfriends. They talk about the realities of how they began to work in prostitution (Tao, sixteen, was asked to do so by his father), how they encountered their first customers. A picture develops that abstracts their sex lives from sexuality and links it to issues of poverty, desperation and necessity. The questioning is remorseless; some of the subjects are moved to tears. Arin Rungjang’s five-channel video installation Welcome to My World (Tee) (2019) explores his childhood fascination with the female transsexual daughter of his babysitter, who mesmerised the artist-to-be with her beauty, but killed herself while Rungjang was still a child. We learn that her mother called her E-Tee – in Thai slang, the E is used before the proper name of a woman and Tee indicates an ethnically Chinese boy; but everyone can get the reference to an alien in a bicycle basket too. In the installation itself, a black-and-white video lingeringly documents the beautiful naked body of a transgender migrant-worker prostitute, whom the artist met while on a recent residency in Germany. It’s an unadorned means of making things visible. But the work goes beyond just that. In a lengthy text pinned on a wall outside the installation, the artist (who is himself gay) links his encounters with E- Tee to his own early confusions about fitting into a binary world and the suicidal thoughts (partly inspired by E-Tee) that came with it, which are then further linked via an interview to the life of the trans prostitute in Germany. The ultimate result is that the beautiful, idealised images in the gallery setting are connected to the broader, rougher, more brutal reality of a life lived outside it. And yet this is a moving tale of sympathy, solidarity, suffering and pain, elements of which are picked up in many other works on show. The first two appear most obviously in David Medalla’s interactive work A Stitch in Time (this version from 2017, but work that has gone through a variety of iterations since 1967), for example, in which visitors are invited to stitch words and objects onto a sheet of fabric. The last two are evident in a series of five papercut works by Xiyadie, which, although exuberant and colourful in form, document the artist’s internal battles, which include an attempt to mutilate his own genitals and the experience of a forced heterosexual marriage. Elsewhere, the blatant eroticism of works such as Yan Xing’s slick video-homage to Robert Mapplethorpe (The History of the Fugue, 2012), Lionel Wendt’s homoerotic photographic portraits or the priapic sexual symbolism of the late Martin Wong’s paintings and Ramesh Mario Nithiyendran’s earthenware sculptures (given the spread of sexualities it purports to represent, the exhibition is, visually, rather cock-heavy) might lead you to think that all art is defined by sexuality. Whereas the latest in Maria Taniguchi’s ongoing series of delicate ‘brick’ paintings (Untitled, 2019) and a chunk of Danh Vo’s atomised Statue of Liberty (We The People, 2011–16) suggest that reflections on that kind of identity are simply one of many things going on. Within this vast assemblage, the former type of work outweighs the latter, however, leading you to wonder whether or not an exhibition such as this one has lost a degree of complexity as much as it has gained in its broader message of tolerance. Although that criticism might be one of the many kinds of intolerance this exhibition seeks to overcome. Spectrosynthesis II – Exposure of Tolerance: LGBTQ in Southeast Asia, Bangkok Art and Culture Centre, 23 November 2019 – 1 March 2020
ArtReview℗Marsden Hartley at Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Humlebæk℗Rodney LaTourelle℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗‘Restless’ is an adjective often used to characterise both Marsden Hartley and his work, due to his nomadic lifestyle and constant reinvention of his painting style in response to shifting influences and artistic ambitions. His complex succession of styles reflected his travels between America and Europe, uniquely combining the reductionism and subjective vision of Continental modernism with a mystic, constructive version of American regionalism. The ongoing sense of experimentation and discovery embedded in the American painter’s work is nevertheless anchored by a very distinct sensibility; a profound emotionality that set his work apart from his contemporaries. One of the largest retrospectives of Hartley ever mounted – over 110 paintings made between 1906 and 1943, the year he died, aged sixty-six – and the first in Europe since the early 1960s, the exhibition brings together the diverse range of Hartley’s canvases (plus drawing, writing and poetry). In a sequence of rooms corresponding to the artist’s travels and stylistic periods, the exhibition is divided chronologically into six ‘chapters’ that include research-style ‘pinup’ boards of related ephemera. Hartley’s agitation might be accounted for by a loneliness and longing that engulfed his hardscrabble childhood, and as an adult he reportedly never lived for more than ten months in any one place; this restlessness is reflected in his artistic inquisitiveness but no doubt also relates to the difficulties of living as a gay man, in societies where homosexuality was illegal, even if accepted in the bohemian circles he moved in. It’s through the coded subtexts of homosexual longing that the show proposes we understand the vision that informs Hartley’s heartbreaking paintings. The Louisiana retrospective repairs his neglect in Europe, while addressing Hartley’s latent homoeroticism (often misunderstood in his lifetime). In so doing it acknowledges the presence of gay desire obscured by the hetero-male modernist canon: the first work here is a Cézanne-style still life, Pears (1911), unmistakable phallic forms nestled together. The final gallery is filled with Hartley’s late-period, larger-than-life ‘hunky’ male figures (1935–43). From the beginning, Hartley’s landscapes, abstracts and still lifes had a throbbing, vivid corporeality; he also often incorporated shapes reminiscent of body parts such as thighs, buttocks and especially phallic forms in his nonfigurative work. Yet soon after a tragic bereavement that marked a peaceful interlude in Nova Scotia, Hartley began to incorporate human figures. These are at once primitivist and sophisticated, often with a single figure against a monochrome background pressed urgently to the picture plane. His figures are surprisingly wooden, with strange proportions and geometric features that might be mistaken for outsider art for the virtuosic pathos Hartley achieves. His work shifts quotidian subjects into the symbolic dimension, yet here he approaches the mythic by evoking a ‘regressive’ sensibility in which visual liabilities are used as overtly emotional assets. Many works in this later style depict beefy, hirsute men, and were disingenuously described by Hartley as created for gymnasiums. Yet considering the homoerotic nature of this work – obvious from today’s perspective – Hartley is clearly, finally, ‘coming out’ here. As curator Mathias Ussing Seeberg has noted: if Hartley painted the landscape like a figure for most of his career, in this final phase he paints the figure like a landscape. The bodies here are tenderly observed yet idealised, almost disembodied, epic and monumental. The resolute loneliness of the artist, perennially an unloved spectator and never a participant, assumes candid physical form. The result is a truly weird, beautiful, absolutely personal vision, establishing an unattainable longing that could be a metaphor for all the neglected dimensions eclipsed by modernism’s emphasis on heteronormative desire. Marsden Hartley, The earth is all I know of wonder, Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, Humlebæk, 19 September 2019 – 19 January 2020
ArtReview℗Notre monde brûle at Palais de Tokyo, Paris℗Daisy Sainsbury℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗A collaboration with Qatari museum Mathaf, Notre monde brûle (Our World Is Burning) offers an ambitious survey of contemporary art from the Middle East and North Africa. Some 30 artists address three interwoven phenomena: the ecological crisis, the successive sociopolitical crises facing the region and a crisis of history, where traditional narratives are being dismantled and supplanted, not least in artistic practice. The tone is set by Amal Kenawy’s The Silent Multitudes (2010), an installation that replicates the dimensions of shoebox flats in Cairo’s poorest neighbourhoods. The walls consist of flammable gas cylinders; inside, a video of a gas cylinder being kicked along the pavement underscores the foreboding atmosphere. Created just before the 2011 Egyptian revolution, Kenawy’s work captures the uneasy feeling of imminent upheaval. Shirin Neshat’s Our House Is on Fire (2013), meanwhile, takes us directly to the revolution’s aftermath, with portraits of Egyptians who lost loved ones during the conflict. While powerful, the photographs look almost too beautiful, too aesthetically sanitised alongside Mounira Al Solh’s I strongly believe in our right to be frivolous (2012–), portraits of Syrian refugees sketched alongside handwritten testimonies. Drawn on the lined paper used to process asylum requests, the images feel improvised, the makeshift artistic practice echoing the necessary resourcefulness of displaced people. Sculptures by American artist Michael Rakowitz, entitled The Invisible Enemy Should Not Exist (2007–), also embed the precarity of the situation they evoke into the substance of the works themselves. After the Fall of Baghdad in 2003, Iraq’s National Museum was looted, and numerous artworks and artefacts destroyed. Using Interpol’s inventory of the missing objects, Rakowitz recreated lifesize replicas assembled from food packaging and Arabic newspapers; these foreground the instability of both cultural heritage and political regimes. This quality reappears in works dealing with environmental themes, such as Khalil El Ghrib’s untitled, undated installation of cardboard, oxidised copper and lichens, depicting the fragile equilibrium of living ecosystems. But while a parallel might be found here between ecological and sociopolitical crises, there are limitations to such comparisons, given the different timescales, geographies and subsequent distribution of responsibility involved. Francis Alÿs’s contribution contextualises many of the surrounding works by examining the discourses that have arisen around geopolitical conflict. Based on time spent with British troops in Afghanistan’s Helmand Province, his backlit oil paintings on tracing paper resemble maps in military headquarters. Abstracted landmasses in yellow and green are labelled with dialectic couplings: subject/ object, us/them, tourist/migrant. These labels evoke cartography’s colonialist history, the way borders and territories are instrumentalised in nationalist rhetoric, but also the terminology of postcolonial theory and the possibility of challenging dominant discourses and their accompanying ideologies. When Notre monde brûle was announced, the Palais de Tokyo faced criticism over its collaboration with Qatar’s state-funded museum. LGBTQ+ groups called for the exhibition to be pulled. Given the show accentuates humanist, socially progressive values in curatorial comments and the works included, the discrepancy between these values and those espoused by its funders doesn’t go unmissed. This raises a question about the political role of art institutions and what we expect of them: should exhibition organisers, as members of an institution, take an overt position? Or, as in this instance, is it enough to exhibit works that challenge the political status quo to hint towards art’s capacity to effect change? The answer clearly differs according to the institutions involved, the constraints of their national legal frameworks and the risks they run by taking such a stance. In certain circumstances, an oblique approach may be the only leeway a curator has; in others, an institution’s silence can hang heavy over the show.  Notre monde brûle, Palais de Tokyo, Paris, 21 February – 17 May 2020
ArtReview℗Diane Simpson at Nottingham Contemporary℗David Trigg℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Diane Simpson’s Samurai 10 (1983) is an impossibly flimsy-looking sculpture. Despite finding its inspiration in the armour of elite Japanese warriors, this wonky freestanding work looks ready to crumple at the slightest breeze. Decorated with pale-red-and-white pencil grids, its intersecting MDF planes pivot and bend in accordance with an unfathomably strange yet satisfying geometry. Simpson’s idiosyncratic aesthetic originated during the mid-1970s, when, as a mature student at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, she began translating her isometric drawings into three-dimensional objects. Early experiments, such as the relief collage Contained Containers (1976), set the tone with its skewed folding forms composed of scraps of wood, cardboard and printed paper. Its industrial appearance is countered by a gentle domesticity, a duality present throughout this modest exhibition at Nottingham Contemporary – remarkably, the artist’s first museum presentation in Europe. Drawing has been fundamental to Simpson’s practice for more than 40 years. Each sculpture begins on graph paper as a precise axonometric projection in which objects are rendered obliquely, producing strange, optical distortions. Like a dressmaker’s pattern, the drawings contain the essential information required to fabricate her meticulous models, all made by hand. Each three-dimensional work is here accompanied by its two-dimensional antecedent, such as the elegant Sleeve-Sling(1997), in which a piece of vaguely conical pink cloth overlaid with perforated aluminium is draped over a suspended bar. An adjacent drawing reveals its source to be a flamboyant Elizabethan dress sleeve. While this game of show-and-tell provides fascinating insights into Simpson’s process, the drawings tend to distract and close down readings. Beyond these formal juxtapositions of flatness and volume arise issues of gender, the symbolism and sociology of clothing and complex tensions between abstraction and figuration. Simpson has acknowledged postminimalists Eva Hesse and Richard Artschwager as influences, as well as postmodern design, art deco and the architectural vernacular of her native Chicago, variously informing her heterodox combinations of pattern, fashion, decor and sculpture. A particularly pleasing example is the curving, finlike form of Court Lady (1985). Inspired by seventeenth-century English court dress and Japanese Sengoku armour, the tall sculpture is laced together with bright red cords that zing against its stained dark exterior. The seemingly disparate clothing styles that inform Simpson’s works are related by their function: the exaggeration and accentuation of certain body parts. Peplum I (2014), for instance, isolates a decorative detail designed to emphasise waistlines: a white skirtlike form with candy-pink edging rests atop a wood and copper base, resembling an occasional table. Though less elegant than other works, it demonstrates the peculiar way that forms coalesce in Simpson’s structures, as details of clothing begin to resemble architectural features that simultaneously suggest items of furniture. Women’s domestic labour is referenced by Simpson’s Apron series (2000–05) and it’s hard not to read these works as semiautobiographical (for years her art languished in obscurity while her responsibilities as a mother took precedence). Indeed, she has recently noted that Apron III (2001) is an evocation of her childhood kitchen. Its glossy cream and olive-green colours mimic the domestic vernacular of suburban homes in postwar America. A waist-height shelf covered with vintage linoleum sports an abstract art-inspired design, a wry comment perhaps on the challenging integration of career and home life. While such works seem quietly political, Simpson denies any feminist agenda, though it seems hardly coincidental that her interest in domesticity and the social codes of clothing often relate to culturally constructed gender roles and the containment, contortion and concealment of female bodies. Claims to the contrary are another instance of strength masquerading as flimsiness.  Diane Simpson, Sculpture, Drawing, Prints 1976–2014, Nottingham Contemporary, 8 February – 3 May 2020
ArtReview℗Transparent Things at Goldsmiths Centre for Contemporary Art, London℗Ben Eastham℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗The protagonist of Vladimir Nabokov’s Transparent Things (1972), a fragment of which serves as ‘script’ for this intricate group show, is Hugh (pronounced ‘you’) Person (pronounced ‘person’). ‘Hullo, person!’, the narrator calls out at the novel’s beginning, but Person can’t hear. Soon after, Person’s discovery of a pencil in a hotel room sets the narrator off on a Proustian journey into the object’s history. The ‘past shines’ through such ‘transparent things’, the narrator explains, before revealing that this pencil was cut from a pine by ‘old Elias Barrowdale’. Which suspiciously godlike deduction might be taken as a hint: the histories of things may be perfectly transparent to the narrator but must remain obscure to persons inside and outside his fiction. The psychological backstory of the brass ashtray placed on a plinth at the entrance to this exhibition, its edges embossed with ‘DEPRESSIVE’ / ‘ALCOHOLIC’ / ‘MOTHER’, might seem as simple as the pencil to parse. Yet Becky Beasley’s teasingly misspelled title – Astray (D.A.M.) (2018) – suggests that the identities of objects and people are more elusive than is convenient for either art critics or the psychoanalysts whom Nabokov so despised. If the privacy of people and things is violated by the intrusion of narrators into their past, then the inclusion by curator Natasha Hoare of so many blocked windows might be read as reasserting the right to an interior life. The association of paintings and photographs with windows is parodied by Marie Lund’s Stills (2015), which stretch soiled curtains into tasteful modernist monochromes; David Hammons’s Untitled (Basketball drawing + stone) (2006) mounts a sheet of paper dirtied by bounced basketballs in a gilt frame balanced, precariously, on a rock. The Blue Window (2017) pictured in Lucy Skaer’s photograph is reencountered as a sculpture on the first floor, its four gridded panes bricked up with lightly crazed lapis lazuli. Laid flat like a trapdoor, Skaer’s opaque glass mirrors Hammons’s reorientation of floor as window, to the same exclusionary effect. The interior of the gallery itself refuses outside scrutiny since Michael Dean has whitewashed its windows as if a shuttered shop, the emulsion applied in cursive ‘f’ shapes like a handwriting exercise. Here, and in two vaguely anthropomorphic concrete obelisks by Dean, language is frustrated. ‘FUCKSAKE’, reads a line of police tape dangling from an outstretched finger, while these figures are crowned by books with butterflies on the covers, splayed open to reveal a stuttering text: ‘…hahaha hahah aha…’. Kerry Tribe’s whirring film installation Parnassius Mnemosyne (2010) also nods to Nabokov’s lepidoptery (it shows magnified images of the eponymous butterfly’s wings) and to the original title – Speak, Mnemosyne – of his 1951 autobiography. That its wings might, like the goddess of memory Mnemosyne, ‘speak’ to novelists and art lovers is little consolation to the butterfly pinned to a board. Its interior life is fatally obscured, not revealed, by its transformation into art. Indeed, the exhibition is most convincing when it avoids portentous and quasiconfessional gestures (such as Theaster Gates’s Hammond organ – an icon of black popular culture imprisoned inside a minimalist wooden cube, it hums mournfully) to more closely resemble Nabokov’s own sketches of butterfly wings: brilliantly patterned, calculated to the point of cruelty and metaphysically meaningless. Prior to entering the hotel room containing the pencil, Person is told that no one remembers him because everyone is dead (except the narrator, of whose imagination he is a figment). The best work here reminds us that the lives of others are hidden behind a screen, and the past is obscure beyond the boundaries of fiction. The only transparent thing is death, through which nothing shines.  Transparent Things, Goldsmiths Centre for Contemporary Art, London, 21 February – 3 May 2020
ArtReview℗Hannah Levy at Casey Kaplan℗Jeppe Ugelvig℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗The body is a strange thing in the eyes of industrial design: soft, sticky and lumpy, it hardly fits the mechanic idealism of twentieth-century modernism, with its slick formalism, shiny surfaces and total celebration of glass and steel. Corporeality – feeling like a body – seems almost totally repressed in the last century of interior design, and this is what makes Hannah Levy’s sculptures such an intensely seductive encounter in the present. Made in two conflicting materials – polished steel and luminous, flesh-toned silicone – Levy’s speculative objects manipulate the somatic to an almost comical extreme, and in the process highlight the anxieties about the body repressed beneath our sanitised designed environment. But the artist’s first exhibition at Casey Kaplan appears to skip the modern era in search of a more complicated object–body discourse, landing somewhere in eighteenth-century decorative arts. Three large chandelierlike structures (all works Untitled, 2019 or 2020) hang at eye height from metal chains in the first room, their grand and dramatically curved steel arms shaped into eerily sharp hooks or claws. Silicone appears either as corporeal lumps coldly pierced by the steel, or as skinlike tissue stretched to ‘dress’ these antagonistic yet playful structures, suggesting some kind of posthuman sacrifice: silicone is the stuff of prosthetics – the ultimate uncanny cutaneous substance. Along the wall, a line of curvy, sconcelike fixtures (again in steel) each support a single asparagus stalk enlarged and cast in fleshy silicone: resting languidly against the cold reflective metal, they evoke the body as a fatigued alien limb, collapsed there or put on display for its decorative quality. In the back, a small trampolinelike structure sits on the floor with hostile, sharp hooks pointing against a potential user. While both Paul Thek and Eva Hesse come to mind as formal precedents, Levy’s camp anthropomorphism is more evocative of the monstrous sensuality of Rococo, whose artists similarly equipped furniture with animal feet and manipulated wood resembling skin (quick research into eighteenth-century Italian furniture led me to several wonderful pieces that could easily fit within the artist’s oeuvre). But while Rococo’s grotesque is often discredited in art history, Levy’s objects read as totally chic: sleek, tactical, humorous and thus highly Instagramable, they capture the zeitgeist of contemporary design aesthetics as it exists between the luxury object and its circulation as image. Building up aesthetic associations through shape and surface, Levy manages to formulate a larger point about the complexities of tastemaking: while the sensual and grotesque haunt design modernism (which still haunts today), the language of 1960s postminimalism has been recouped in the design world of the present, albeit congealed and reduced to pure form, to fashionable surface. The body, meanwhile, continues to float as a scattered set of signifiers, appearing almost accidentally in objects and images, leaving us anxious, triggered, turned on. This point seems unnecessarily underscored in a series of stocklike photographs of manicured hands delicately baiting a fishhook in the back of the gallery, directly referencing the earlier chandelier: unnecessary, perhaps, because the sculptures already speak so powerfully, so penetratingly, about the corporeality of imagehood.  Hannah Levy, Pendulous Picnic, Casey Kaplan, New York, 23 January – 29 February 2020
ArtReview℗Ree Morton at ICA Los Angeles℗Jonathan Griffin℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗Facts and suppositions about Ree Morton’s life might not be so integral to our reading of her art if she hadn’t died in 1977, aged forty, having started late, leaving behind just six or so years of work: a compact oeuvre of sculpture, drawing and installation that acquires an almost unbearable poignancy when framed by the knowledge of its sudden ending. Nowhere in The Plant That Heals May Also Poison – the survey that originated at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia, in 2019, and now concludes at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles – do we learn how Morton died. Even in the catalogue, presumably to avoid sensationalising her narrative, it’s not revealed until page 64 that she died after being injured in a car crash, then never mentioned again. As with any artist who died young, Morton’s narrative is burdened by pathos; in the loosely chronological hang at the ICA LA, the work accrues a gathering sense of doom. The earliest works, such as the wall-mounted Wood Drawings (1971) made from scrap wood, pencil and felt-tip, combine the expansiveness of mapmaking with the humility and simplicity of Agnes Martin’s drawings. Over time, text and appropriated content enter the work, and along with it hints of Morton’s wry humour and sharp sense of irony. There’s no escaping the feeling that a sickly presence was growing inside the work, despite its often upbeat aspect: her preference for pastel colours, always slightly muddy; the toxic-looking, malleable plastic known as Celastic that became her trademark material; her motifs of drooping, soggy bows and thick-petalled flowers; her use of weak yellow lightbulbs, forever on. In fact, art for Morton was a route to self-realisation, celebration and joy. In exhibition notes, ICA Philadelphia curator Kate Kraczon and ICA LA curator Jamillah James handle Morton’s story with sensitivity, detailing the revelatory evening drawing classes she attended during the 1960s while living in Jacksonville, Florida, with her three children, and what they describe as ‘the happiest summer of her life’, spent with them in Newfoundland, Canada, and which inspired the maplike pencil Newfoundland Drawings and the wood, canvas and acrylic sculpture Souvenir Piece (both 1973). As her work developed, Morton increasingly exploited the visual clichés attached to her role as a woman and mother. In a typed funding application from 1976 (found in one of two vitrines of photographs and print ephemera), she describes wryly her ‘classic housewife / mother with unsympathetic husband situation’, noting that her children are now living with their father while she concentrates on her work in New York City – ‘an exciting phase of ripening ideas and images’. The corner installation For Kate (1976) includes two twisting Celastic streamers that loosely bracket a smattering of sticky-looking sculpted roses and a painting of more roses that resembles an old-fashioned tea tray (the title possibly refers to Morton’s grandmother). In Don’t worry, I’ll only read you the good parts (1975) – perhaps the most heartbreaking work in the show – the titular promise is painted on a wrinkled sheet of Celastic that resembles a drying animal hide, accompanied by a cartoonish yellow flower. It is a promise that, though lovingly sincere, seems wrapped in the knowledge of its inadequacy. Morton paid tribute to the people, places and things she loved in artworks that are, in many cases, rather hard to love. It was almost as if she was testing how far deep and true sentiment could carry forms that were not – and are still not – conventionally beautiful. It takes time to fall in love with the things Morton made, and that seems to be how the artist wanted it. Ree Morton, The Plant That Heals May Also Poison, Institute of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, 16 February – 14 June 2020
ArtReview℗Mourning: On Loss and Change at Hamburger Kunsthalle℗John Quin℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗While two museum guides are pointing me towards the café, a woman’s singing, hymnlike, suddenly soars from somewhere behind them. I quip, “Gott kommt!” – God is coming – and they don’t laugh, knowing what I’m in for: an emotional wringing through Mourning’s mangle of death. The vocalising constitutes the first work in the show, a sound installation called Four Part Harmony (2020) by Susan Philipsz. Based on an old Irish folksong, it refers to the Celtic tradition of keening – ritualised singing for the deceased. The atrium fills with the artist’s haunting voice, the composition arranged in ascending and descending scales. The key work in this show, which brings together some 30 artists from 15 countries, comes next: Andy Warhol’s Jackie (1964). The small silvery silkscreen has JFK’s widow sunk deep in her new world of emptiness and pain, and sets the tone for the show: it’s another descent, a soul plunge like a prolonged sigh. Bereavement can be disturbingly upsetting, as with Adrian Paci’s Interregnum (2017), with its edited video footage of mass mourning following the deaths of Stalin, Mao and other dictators. How frightening to witness the ease of manipulated hysteria. Some seem genuinely upset; not a few, you suspect, are faking it. What disturbs is that you are never sure which. Bas Jan Ader’s I’m too sad to tell you (1970–71) is still too sad to look at for long, even if you don’t know his fate. Unfortunately Ragnar Kjartansson’s God (2007), installed in the next room, comes across as slight alongside such heavyweight pathos. The Icelandic artist croons, in the louche manner of a 1950s torch singer, that “sorrow conquers happiness”. (Cheers for that.) A moment of tragicomic respite arrives via two Ghanaian artists who design coffins. Ataa Oko’s 80 Zeichnungen (2004–07) is a grid of drawings picturing speculative coffins – shaped like ducks, cars, crabs – while Kudjoe Affutu’s celebratory orange-and-black-striped wooden minicoffin, Tiger (2006), might look good on (what was once) your mantelpiece. More acute sadness arrives with photojournalist Paul Fusco’s famous RFK Funeral Train (1968/2019). Mourners stand mute alongside the tracks as the body of the assassinated senator is transported to Washington, DC. We see black and white, young and old, united as if in Martin Luther King, Jr’s dream but in reality together only in tragedy. The death of hope is right here. Philippe Parreno’s short video reenactment, June 8, 1968 (2009), if anything reintensifies the grief: on watching, all shifts dreamily – to paraphrase Seamus Heaney’s poem ‘A Northern Hoard’ (1972) – while, in the distance, Philipsz keens. Philipsz has two more works here. One, Returning (2004), is a film loop of people visiting the Karl Liebknecht memorial in Berlin’s Tiergarten; another political hero assassinated, another utopian vision crushed. Things get even sadder with Aslan Ġoisum’s video People of No Consequence (2016), where a hall in Grozny slowly fills with shuffling elderly people, the last 119 survivors of Stalin’s forced deportations from Chechnya. The worst is saved for last: the violent death of a child. How to show what should never be seen? Khaled Barakeh’s series The Untitled Images (2014), altered photographs from the war in Syria, aim straight for the gut. He uses a scalpel to excise the victims from the picture. But the adults remain intact holding the child-shape, a white void; the slumped, defeated postures of the living horrify. With wilful political ignorance of humanitarian truths all around, and scientific concerns about the death of the planet, a show majoring on grief that accentuates the personal and communitarian implications of mourning seems entirely appropriate to the moment. Mourning: On Loss and Change, Hamburger Kunsthalle, 7 February – 14 June 2020
ArtReview℗Lydia Ourahmane at CCA Wattis Institute℗Sam Korman℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗There’s a haunting sense of immanence at play in Lydia Ourahmane’s Solar Cry exhibition, a spirit seemingly distilled from biblical immanence and the artist’s autobiography. Ourahmane grew up in Algeria during the 1990s, facing persecution as a member of a radical Christian minority. Her family moved from safehouse to safehouse, until finding asylum in London. The chapter in Ourahmane’s life presented here concerns her recent relocation back to Algiers. On one hand it is a story of faith, but more involved with the carrier than an immaterial sense of belief. The exhibition centres on an expedition Ourahmane took to Tassili N’Ajjer, a remote region in the Sahara known for cave paintings. Inside an empty cave she left a tape recorder, the overnight recordings from which became the audiowork Solar Cry (all works but one 2020). To put this gesture in perspective: she crossed a desert, entrusted herself to strangers and camped out in a remote area known for military raids; and rather than sit in a cave herself, she entrusted the experience to outdated technology. The thing is: do I believe her? I barely noticed the work at first, yet once you become aware of the low thrum emanating from the gallery’s walls, you can’t unhear it, forever aware of the resonant emptiness at its heart – a clunky HVAC system of the soul. Other works similarly address how immaterial factors shape the body. In warrior girl c.12,000 b.c. the artist was inspired by a cave drawing depicting the titular symbol of female daring, filming herself getting a copy of it tattooed on her body. In my generation, spiritual tattoos have a certain connotation, but the video nonetheless gives me pause to consider whether the scarcity of questionable tattoos on my body actually demonstrates a lack of conviction. Elsewhere, 3kgs salt (2020) litters the entire gallery with crunchy rock salt. A nails-on-chalkboard sensation becomes a full-body wrench when I discover Tassili N’Ajjer was once part of a trade route on which slaves were exchanged for the eponymous weight of salt. And there is a certain congruity between the Polaroid Cave painting of a Woman giving birth c.6,000–12,000 b.c. and the wall drawing ℵ0. For the latter, Ourahmane excavated a section of drywall and pencilled the mathematical figures directly on the concrete. In Judaism, aleph stands for the singularity of God, but here it is multiplied by zero, effectively impregnating the gallery with the equation for infinity’s bottom. ℵ0 is intended as a permanent work: the drywall will be replaced, concealing it. Ourahmane’s idea is that memories and rumours will attest to its ongoing presence. I wonder why I am now responsible for this legacy. Further complicating matters is her decision to cover the skylights with lighting gels, casting everything in a crystalline blue. She doesn’t call it an artwork, but in a show that attempts to find a material basis for expressing the ineffable – in a way, to name it – why should we take Ourahmane at her word? Still, with 1st draft of my Mother’s book “Divine Encounters” (1974–92), Ourahmane offers a strong argument for following her on this journey. Documenting the sacrifices her family made for faith, this tale would resonate widely, yet the only copy resides at the gallery. Again, Ourahmane’s choices place you at a crossroads. Are you one of the faithful, respecting the artist’s intentions for the text? Do you play the apostate, relaying her mother’s life story in this review? Or do you simply content yourself with the intimacy of knowing a secret? In Ourahmane’s show, faith isn’t just a matter of belief. It depends on the strength of your desire. 
ArtReview℗Elena Asins at KOW, Berlin℗Martin Herbert℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗℗A couple of things that are useful to know about Elena Asins upfront: she was a pioneer of computer-enabled art and, for a while, studied semiotics with Noam Chomsky. The latter fact is relevant insofar as the Madrid-born artist, who died in 2015 aged seventy-five, used digital animation, sculpture, concrete poetry and a variety of two-dimensional works to figure, in sequential nonrepresentational art, something analogous to Chomsky’s ‘universal grammar’: an underlying set of structural rules posited as innate to all humans. Asins’s work, powered by the energies of cybernetics and combinatorial theory – such as Ramsey’s theorem, which argues that disorder always seeks to resolve itself into regularity – suggests the invisible presence of systems underlying everything. The scope and, frequently, Euclidean rigour of her practice were on full display at a 2011 retrospective in her home city’s Museo Reina Sofía. KOW, meanwhile, doesn’t even attempt to compress it into the one upstairs room they’ve devoted to her. Instead, they offer a tightly circumscribed sample, seemingly pulled from a dusty archival box: ‘rare works from the 1980s’, which turns out to mean an austere selection of computer printouts arranged in grids and friezes, in which black abstract forms pass through sprightly modulations, underwritten by alien logic. Reading one long framed strip of 18 conjoined pieces of dot-matrix printer paper – dated 1989, and seemingly titled Canons 18/11 (there is no list of works) – from left to right, we first see one biomorphic blob hovering above another. On the next sheet, it’s joined by a third, while one of the preexisting ones has morphed slightly. What follows is constant quiet permutation, shapes changing, vanishing, reappearing, the whole looking like not only animation cells but a set of dance steps without music, the glyphs finally shrinking and winking out. Asins, here and elsewhere, mobilises sheer aesthetic confidence. Just as you don’t have to be a musicologist to note the grace and sense of resolution that permeates Mozart’s music – which she also studied closely – these works make intuitive sense even while suggesting a meaning or purpose you can’t quite grasp. In 3 in 3 Perspective Scale 33 newplan (Nr.1-49) (1989), a 7×7 lattice of variously agglomerated Necker cubes – the ones with ambiguously reversible perspective – permute mutely from sheet to sheet. As you look, noting where a section of geometric architecture has vanished and another, or several more, appeared, Asins’s work appears in dialogue with both Minimalism and the allover painting that preceded it – this sequence, large as it is, insinuates itself as an extract from an endless process. Asins’s idealism still resonates, though an exhibition titled Machines to Change the World in 2020 can’t escape irony and melancholy: count the ways that computer technologies have indeed changed our world, from job automation to the isolation effects of social media to drone warfare. These works, beamed in from another time, implicitly indict our own, even while they offer a bleep of theoretical optimism: things might seem chaotic to us, but in Asins’s universe, disorder is just an illusion. 
ArtReview℗Andrew Norman Wilson at Ordet, Milan℗Barbara Casavecchia℗Reviews℗01/04/2020℗A show full of optical wonders, tension and an anxiety that’s hard to resist℗I started this piece when the destruction of the infamous ‘Vele’ housing complex in Scampia, Naples (have you watched Gomorrah?) was all over the news. I’m finishing it in the shadow of reports on the spreading of COVID-19 virus in northern Italy: TV, phone, computer screens constantly alight around the house. Perfect timing to ponder Andrew Norman Wilson’s Lavender Town Syndrome, where collective imagination, utopian architecture, conspiracy theories, mortality, emotional overload and extreme optical strain are gathered together to question our perception of what the artist calls ‘truthiness’. Presented at Ordet, a newly opened space in Milan’s Porta Romana area, the American artist’s exhibition revolves around a new multichannel video: Z = |Z/Z●Z-1 mod 2|-1 (all works 2019), projected in slightly different versions on three screens installed in the main space. Each variant begins with the same sequence of extended zooming shots (filmed with telephoto lenses usually employed for wildlife documentaries) of a single balcony of the iconic Marina City complex in Chicago, designed during the 1960s by architect Bertrand Goldberg – a “concrete lotus flower” in “the most square city on earth”, as Wilson remarks in voiceover. While the vantage point and visual trajectory remain claustrophobically identical, with a touch of Rear Window-ish voyeurism, the subjects on the balcony change: a bees’ nest, large dried lotus seed pods, corncobs inside a BBQ, a sculpture, two towers made of biscuits recalling the shape of Marina City, twin kids wearing identical Star Wars jerseys and finally a yellow papier-mâché Pikachu, modelled after a meme found on Reddit. Their appearance accompanies a convoluted voiced-over story of a small group of artists who drop out of the art system to instead embrace socially engaged design and deal with parenting dilemmas. From here on, the versions of the video diverge, to include diverse imaging technologies, such as photorealistic raytraced animations (based on materials actually existing in nature), and lysergic, trancelike 3D fractal ‘ray-marching’ animations, developed by the computer engineer Code Parade. These visions extend from macro to micro, to infinitesimal, to out of focus and back again, in endless chains of replication and multiplication of the same pattern or image, with no escape route from the maze. From one of the video iterations, Z = |Z/Z●Z-1 mod 2|-1: Lavender Town Syndrome, we learn that the syndrome in question is named after a creepy lilac-coloured village in Pokémon games, hosting “the Tower”, a structure “filled with countless memorials for deceased Pokémon”. During the 1990s, the syndrome supposedly addicted hundreds of Japanese children, pushed into anger outbursts, seizures and even suicide by the binaural beats of the Pokémon background music. Wilson’s theatre of vision is so full of optical wonders and charged with tension and anxiety that it’s hard to resist the lures of its digital samsara. The objects from the ‘real world’ on display in the gallery – like the same roughly fashioned Pikachu featuring in the video, installed next to a row of green Romanesco broccoli (whose florets naturally replicate Fibonacci fractals) – appear ridiculously low-res in comparison. Reality looks better, and feels better, when augmented and fictionalised, as in Pokémon Go. Goodbye, then, to the good old days of childhood innocence, naive ecstasy, collective enthusiasm and the utopian optimism of Silicon Valley. In the last room, a video of the first seconds of a hand-drawn cartoon created for the 1965 Charlie Brown Christmas Special, accompanied by the first notes of its original jazz score, loops endlessly on the vintage screen of an iMac G4. A snowy landscape, a baby-blue frozen pond and a sorrowful title: I don’t feel the way I’m supposed to feel.  Andrew Norman Wilson, Lavender Town Syndrome, Ordet, Milan, 4 December 2019 – 15 February 2020
ArtReview℗12th Bamako Encounters: Streams of Consciousness℗Kimberly Bradley℗Reviews℗13/03/2020℗Kimberly Bradley finds the River Niger to be a fitting analogy for the streams of ideas flowing through the photography biennial ℗My first morning in the Malian capital, I parted my hotel-room curtains and saw the River Niger. Broad and blue-brown, framed in deep green foliage, flowing through a chaotic urban landscape on its long path to the Atlantic – it took my breath away. And clearly it also had an effect on Bonaventure Ndikung, in his guise as director of this 12th edition of the Bamako Encounters Photography Biennial: the Niger is the most literal among the Streams of Consciousness that flow through his exhibition.  The river sometimes appears as a backdrop or character, as in Djoliba, Fleuve Niger (2019), a video by Malian multimedia artist Dickonet about a spirit possessing a woman and ultimately purifying the river, and Halima Haruna’s Other Side of the Creek (2018–19), a five-minute video exploring ancestral spirituality as an antidote to the devastation wreaked by the oil industry in the Niger Delta. But Ndikung (a Berlin-based Cameroonian) runs just as far with the psychological, literary and musical interpretations of the biennial’s titular phrase. Indeed, South African pianist Abdullah Ibrahim and African-American drummer Max Roach’s 1977 improvised jazz piece of the same name was clearly an inspiration to Ndikung. The piece’s legacy of African/African-diaspora collaboration (the biennial features over 85 artists and collectives from Africa and beyond) and mashed-up genres resonates throughout the event’s many venues: as in editions past, the Malian National Museum, the Palace of Culture, the District Museum, the Conservatory of the Arts and Multimedia and the Modibo Keita Memorial; and this time, a girls school, a defunct cinema and other smaller venues join in.  The multiple topics addressed within the show’s four ‘chapters’ (their pithy titles, like ‘We Came from Left, We Came from Right’, culled from poems by Ghanaian author and politician Ama Ata Aidoo) emerge slowly: displacement, the politics and poetics of ecosystems, future hopes, solidity and invisibility. Videoworks are deployed to pack in historical references (The Otolith Group’s The Nucleus of the Great Union, 2017, dives into African-American Richard Wright’s photographic archive of his first trip to Africa in 1953). And just as often to offer poetic pause: in Bouchra Khalili’s The Typographer (2019), poet Jean Genet’s final sentence – ‘Put all the images in language in a place of safety and make use of them, for they are in the desert, and it is in the desert we must go and look for them’ –.is seen being slowly typeset and printed. In Buhlebezwe Siwani’s twochannel AmaHubo (2018) a group of white-clad women in an arid landscape – presumably Siwani’s native South Africa – perform rituals as the artist’s steady voice recites lines of resistance in English and isiZulu against violence and spiritual colonisation. The work additionally speaks to the biennial’s subtle focus on female perspectives.  Documentary photography in all its subgenres is plentiful. The Invisible Borders Trans-African Photography Organisation, for example, is an ongoing rotating collective (one of several collectives in this biennial) of photographers, filmmakers and writers who road-trip through the continent, documenting landscapes and people along their journeys with an almost photojournalistic methodology presented here as a slideshow. Other series trace the urban lives of African diasporas in Toronto (where Yannick Anton shoots dancefloor images of queer nightlife); China (where Mansour Ciss Kanakassy follows African traders in Guangzhou, home to one of China’s largest African populations); South London (where Adama Jalloh captures her local community’s bustling street life in stark black-and-white images); and elsewhere.  Then there’s continent-spanning portraiture. Felicia Abban’s portraits of Ghanaians during the 1960s and 70s reveal raw postindependence optimism and, incidentally, some fabulous 1960s fashion. While Fanta Diarra’s contemporary images of Malian women modelling castoff fast-fashion from the West show intercontinental cause and effect. (The latter are part of Fatima Bocoum’s show-within-a-show Musow Ka Touma Sera –‘This is Women’s Era’ – featuring work by six female Malian photographers, collectively challenging patriarchal cultural norms.) Khalil Nemmaoui’s staged ‘portraits’ of the boxy Renault 12 sedan in filmic Moroccan settings depict the cars that locals customise so they can run on (much cheaper) propane and become fetish and livelihood alike.  Few artists visibly manipulate photographs to play with the medium, and those who do often question identity: Egypt-based Ibrahim Ahmed’s elegant mixed-media collages Burn What Needs to be Burned (2018) grapple with how normative masculinity clashes with or connects to individuality; his muscular self-portraits are rife with exaggerations, erasures and superimpositions. And in Fixing Shadows, Julius and I (2018–19), Ghanaian photographer Eric Gyamfi digitally melds his own self-portrait with a much older image of musician Julius Eastman to create hundreds of hybrid portraits, densely installed over both sides of a vast freestanding wall; here, time and space palpably compress and expand.  Like a river, Encounters flows and meanders. But throughout is an undertone of strength and hope: it is former rapper Fototala King Massassy’s Tenir (2019) – a series of black- and-white portraits of the same clenched fist sporting oversize rings inscribed with sacred symbols or secret formulas – that best captures this biennial’s combination of clear messages and mysterious layers, its shouts and soft whispers, sometimes in the same piece. Streams of Consciousness, Bamako Encounters, 30 November – 31 January
ArtReview℗Sharjah Architecture Triennial: Rights of Future Generations℗Mark Rappolt℗Reviews℗05/03/2020℗Mark Rappolt considers what is gained and what is lost in the expanded definition of architecture proposed at this inaugural edition℗In art circles, architecture exhibitions get a bad rap. ‘[I] wasn’t convinced that an art biennial should be hosting an architecture edition,’ writes Hoor Al-Qasimi, Sharjah Architecture Triennial chairperson, in the guidebook to its inaugural edition (she’s also president and director of the Sharjah Art Foundation, which organises the emirate’s longstanding art biennial). ‘I often found exhibitions about architecture limiting, and sometimes detached from the broader issues that surround them,’ she continues. Which already leaves you wondering whether or not this is going to be an exhibition about architecture at all.  Part of the problem is that in architecture exhibitions you’re always conscious (with or without reason) that you’re looking at something that’s standing in for the real thing, a reference that has no independent ‘life’ beyond the referent. As opposed to artworks, say, which are supposed to be self-sufficient independent entities (even a portrait presupposes its subject’s death). So perhaps it’s not surprising that the triennial’s curator, Adrian Lahoud, has chosen to use this multivenue presentation, titled Rights of Future Generations and featuring 35 projects, to attempt to redefine the common-sense definition of architecture. Buildings are out (by and large); management of the environment, ecology, land rights and land use are in.  At the Al-Qasimiyah School, a former elementary school constructed during the mid 1970s, whose repetitive cell-like classrooms serve as one of the triennial’s main venues, the new ways are not always in evidence. Take Bangkok-based architecture studio (all)zone’s Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun (2019). The title (lifted from a 1968 Pink Floyd track) conjures apocalyptic sci-fi narratives: we’re all gonna burn! The work itself is more prosaic: a passive alternative to air conditioning that offers environmental and psychological (it connects people to the ‘natural’ environment) benefits. It’s an aesthetically pleasing red and orange fabric net, spanning a courtyard. The gallery next door is air conditioned, leaving you to ponder whether the work represents an idea, an ideal, a product, a colourful, decorative geometry or simply a throwback, a fantasy in a land in which architecture and air-conditioning are now so intricately linked that you’re not sure which is the product of which. Indeed, air-conditioning is one of the innovations that prompted the construction of a new souk in Al Jubail back in 2015, leaving the old market (constructed during the early 1980s) available to be the triennial’s second hub. ‘The old market was crowded, lacked proper ventilation and was smelly,’ one relieved shopper told The National at the time of the upgrade, not realising that she was talking about an important piece of the emirate’s architectural heritage that would one day anchor the triennial ‘within the context of Sharjah’s long history as a trade hub, with a vibrant, multi-ethnic landscape cultivated by migration and exchange’.  Back on message (and in the former school), Dogma’s Platforms (2019), a series of geometric details and a book, archives the foundations of architecture through an index of 24 historical examples of the platform – from aboriginal Bora rings and Ancient Greek threshing floors to Jørn Utzon’s Sydney Opera House – in order to suggest that the levelled ground from which architecture begins is not a pragmatic point of connection between a structure and a base, but rather a site upon which people meet or gather to interact: the byproduct of social and political negotiation. It’s a message that Dogma singularly fails to communicate in visual terms (perhaps because the argument is at best visually uninteresting or at worst fundamentally nonvisual), but that finds extension (and, in a sense, extension is what this exhibition is really about) in Feral Atlas Collective’s nearby ‘transdisciplinary experiment in the art of telling terrible stories’ (a multimedia archive documenting the nondesigned byproducts of human intervention in ecologies and landscapes). Feral Atlas (2019) is presented in such a way that it looks like an exploded ebook. Swiping through text and image, presented on tablets and screens, we learn about how railway construction in the Bay of Bengal led to the rampant propagation of water hyacinths clogging up its waterways, cutting out its light and increasing oxygen demand; we learn about how the poisonous cane toads introduced to Australian sugar plantations to control native pests went rampant, devastating the indigenous ecology. ‘We work in the hope that this kind of noticing will make a difference,’ the collective concludes, without entering the specifics of how or to whom. But perhaps the real effect of this is to suggest that architecture’s status as the locus of political and social negotiation (an argument that was much more powerfully communicated in the talks programme that marked the triennial’s opening, covering topics such as the struggle for water rights of the Quechua people in the Atacama desert, the problematics of humanitarianism in Gaza and the protection of native seeds in Mexico, to name but a few) extends to its relationship with non-humans too.  It is humans that remain at the centre of the most successful elements on show here  And yet despite a sense that one of Lahoud’s goals is to propose that ‘rights’ belong to landscapes as much as to people, it is humans that remain at the centre of the most successful elements on show here. Marina Tabassum Architects’ Inheriting Wetness (2019), a study of the changing territory in the delta region of southern Bangladesh, where land emerges and submerges in a way that forces a migratory living on local residents (whose houses are often built so that they be easily dismantled), provides an impetus to illuminate often murky ownership records for lands that may one day reemerge from the waters as an inheritance for future generations. Presented in three stilt houses (and as such one of the only projects that directly addressed building) it is nevertheless the interviews with residents and their personal stories that bring the project and its display to life. ‘Someday my son will build me a brick building,’ says one of the elderly interviewees. Although the triennial, as a whole, buries such basic desires. Staying with the theme of people, the Ngurrara Canvas II (1997) is an abstract painting that maps a territory and played a key role in a successful native title claim put forward by Aboriginal communities from the Great Sandy Desert in Australia. Almost uninterpretable by a non-native audience, the painting is on display at the Sharjah Foundation, where it was activated at the triennial’s opening when its makers and their descendants walked across it to describe the landscape it represents and to tell the stories of where they were from and where they had travelled. Meanwhile, in the local desert (about 45 minutes outside the city), DJ and composer Nicolás Jaar (Chilean– American, based in New York) is seated on the ground outside the ruined Mleiha Fort, entertaining a crowd of lounging listeners, splayed out on cushions around him with a new ambient soundwork experienced via 16 speakers buried in the sand. The idea, one presumes, is that this meditative experience might encourage them to feel and hear the desert. But he abandons the work shortly before the end saying that they might better experience the landscape and its ruins without his intervention. More esoteric than that is artist Lawrence Abu Hamdan’s multimedia lecture-performance Natq (2019), originally commissioned for last year’s Sharjah art biennial, which further positions storytelling as the central feature of this triennial via the work’s exploration of xenoglossy, reincarnation and the possibility of past lives as a legitimate (and perhaps the only) means by which hidden, concealed or overlooked injustices can be revealed and made right. Just as you’d learned that it was painting that was supposed to do that. One of the curiosities of the triennial’s vision of an expanded realm of architecture is that it seems to look everywhere except where it is in the rapidly urbanising territory of the UAE. As intriguing as Tabassum’s display is (and, let’s face it, the way things are going the problems it covers are going to be shared by more and more of us), what of, for example, the estimated 700,000 Bangladeshi migrants, who often live and work under difficult circumstances in the country? What about the people who just want hygiene and shelter? There’s an abiding sense in which a real common-sense definition of architecture gets lost here in the attempt to create a definition that expands away from bricks and mortar. But the implications of Lahoud’s thought are as intriguing as they are problematic. Perhaps the real assertion in this triennial is that, left to their own devices, humans create problems not solutions. And that the best we can hope for from architecture is merely an organised means by which to clean up our mess.   Rights of Future Generations, Sharjah Architecture Triennial, 9 November 2019 – 8 February 2020
ArtReview℗Antony Gormley at Brooklyn Bridge Park Pier 3, New York℗Sam Korman℗Reviews℗05/03/2020℗Sam Korman sizes up the British sculptor’s temporary public project, commissioned as part of K-pop band BTS’s art initiative – through 27 March℗Peering through New York Clearing (2020), Antony Gormley’s installation at the tip of Pier 3, I took notice of the skyline of Lower Manhattan, which is visible in the background. As a response to the orderly logic of Manhattan’s urban grid, Gormley has unspooled 18km of 25mm square-section aluminium, lashing it to itself here and there with steel lathing until it resembles a sizeable ball of yarn, a cache of razor wire or a bird’s nest, depending on how hospitable toward it you feel. It rises to 15m or so, and encompasses about the same area as a basketball court. The press release calls it a ‘quantum drawing’, and any child would be happy, despite rules against it, to amuse themselves in such an alluring playground.  Otherwise, for adults, it’s hard to see any similar merits. There are some technical aspects to applaud. The work’s many points of intersection with itself are held together by multiple steel ribbons, so that particularly dense clusters resemble the unsettling nests of wires found atop, say, Tokyo telephone poles, though, to me, they exhibit an uncanny similarity to the informal watering and ventilation systems my mom devised to grow cacti in her backyard year-round. As with one of her ad hoc greenhouses, it is equally impossible to discern in New York Clearing where one thing starts and another ends. In reality, the best part about Gormley’s construction may not be the thing itself, but its shadow, which collapses the composition’s airy linework into a dense, spatially disorienting photogram, as if László Moholy-Nagy had made a work on the adjacent sidewalk.  Visitors may be momentarily distracted by Gormley’s three-dimensional scribble, but it is no match for the skyscrapers of Lower Manhattan. They simply tower over New York Clearing, broadcasting the names of such corporate behemoths as Verizon and AT&amp;T across the harbour. The corporate context is not inappropriate for the sculpture. New York Clearing is a commission of ‘Connect, BTS’, a global public art initiative supported by K-pop superstars BTS. According to its website, the programme ‘aims to redefine the relationships between art and music, the material and immaterial, artists and their audiences, artists and artists, theory and practice’. And I suppose it does: in 2020, global brands, seeking to insinuate themselves into every facet of public space, fund ‘pop ups’ and ‘activations’; effectively public gatherings that allow them to conduct social listening. In practical terms, this means scraping Instagram for data on everyone who tags, or even visits one of these temporary monuments; algorithms are already sophisticated enough to identify particular backdrops, especially unique artworks like New York Clearing. While place making is always fraught with contradictory interests – the surrounding park itself doubles as a flood wall to protect neighbouring apartment buildings – Gormley could unravel 384,400km of square-section aluminium, enough to reach the Moon, and still this corporate space could contain it.   Antony Gormley, New York Clearing, Brooklyn Bridge Park Pier 3, New York, 5 February – 27 March 2020
ArtReview℗Richard Nonas at Galerie Hubert Winter, Vienna℗Max L. Feldman℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗℗Richard Nonas’s sculptures play with some strange dialectics. The veteran American artist, whose work both converses with and diverges from Minimalism, gives with one hand and takes with the other. He reckons the viewer should feel how his works, as he says, ‘create place itself’, distinguishing between ‘space’ (just there without us) and ‘place’ (which is named, used and lives in our collective memory). He wants his sculptures to transform space into place; at the same time, although his poetic verbal and written statements often refer to time, change and memory, the relation between narrative and space is never resolved. It’s unclear how you get from space to place beyond the act of plonking a work in a gallery or museum. This limits our emotional responses by forcing us in two directions at once: requiring unemotional phenomenological reflections on how we look at these objects as we do so, while staying open to them in their pure silent presence in this place at this time. The two simple, austere pieces in swerve (of shore) to bend (of bay) (both 2020), whose title comes from James Joyce’s 1939 Finnegans Wake, are easily described. swerve consists of 82 roughhewn, light brown woodblocks placed on the floor at regular intervals, the sequence curving from one end of the gallery to the other. bend is a collection of 19 angular, rusty black-steel sculptures, placed on the walls like small paintings, in evenly spaced groups of three. Ponder all these, and the contradictions between what we can see (or just think about) on the one hand, and the space/place story on the other, start to pile up. Over the years, critics have clarified Nonas’s relation to Minimalism. Unlike its first wave, the intelligibility of Nonas’s work does not, they say, rely on the existence of unified ‘ideal’ space. That only deals with one side of the contradiction, though, because it ignores time. Thinking like this makes swerve a kind of sequence without succession, showing us what makes it possible to perceive anything as anything in general, while at the same time suppressing time as one of the two a priori conditions of experience. Nonas doesn’t deny time is real or necessary; but it’s strange that an artist who initially studied literature and anthropology, and always mentions myths and ancient storytelling traditions, resists narrative. He gives viewers their independence, letting them decide for themselves how space turns into place. But if he isn’t telling a story, feeling something about the work in this gallery, here and now, becomes tough. One way around this is so subtle as to be almost unnoticeable. It’s about the viewer’s body, not the objects. You can only see the whole sequence of swerve, curving from the back room towards the street-facing window at the front, from a strictly delimited space – determined by your height and leg span – towards the back of the main gallery space. There is, however, no way for one pair of eyes to see all the wall sculptures (bend) at once, because the shape of the rooms and angles of the walls do not permit it. This isn’t a visual or spatial trick, but a contradictory device that briefly gives you the illusion of taking a timeless view of space but still lets the object dictate your movements. Nonas isn’t showing us objects with complex histories, but the appearance of things in space at some basic level. Doing that, however, undermines what he says about his own project. This is another contradiction, just one more open question that won’t ever close. But, Nonas would say, it just is.  Richard Nonas, swerve (of shore) to bend (of bay), Galerie Hubert Winter, Vienna, 17 January – 29 February 2020
ArtReview℗William N. Copley at Galerie Max Hetzler, Berlin℗Martin Herbert℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Martin Herbert considers the prolific career of the gallerist-turned-artist℗If William N. Copley had never picked up a paintbrush, you might still want to read a biography of him. During the 1940s he was a California gallerist specialising in Surrealism, a friend of Marcel Duchamp, Francis Picabia (an apparent influence on his own later art) and Man Ray. He began exhibiting his own paintings, of which more in a moment, during the early 50s, under the name CPLY; by the mid-60s, in the wake of the second of his five divorces, he was again in entrepreneurial mode, publishing portfolios of twentieth-century artist collaborations titled, notably, SMS (for ‘Shit Must Stop’). During the 70s his own art turned from erotic to borderline pornographic, foxing what constituted his American public. He died in 1996. The Ballad of William N. Copley, a miniretrospective that nevertheless leaves out Copley’s signature painted screens, stretches from 1959 to 92.  In the earliest work, Palladium (1959–63), Copley has already established his trademark unabashed fascination with the mythic locales of the heterosexual American male (remember, five divorces), in this case a revue where lace-wrapped black women frolic together while men sit nursing wines and, distantly across a chequerboard floor, the band plays on. This work, with its compulsively symmetrical composition and faceless figures, is on the lip of what used to be called outsider art. But Copley was very much an insider, and one can’t miss the influence of Henri Matisse in the patterning and rhyming curves of the Western barroom scene Natchez Nan Watched Derringer Dan (1966), with its two behatted men playing poker while a woman prowls around them, a painting of a female nude behind them rendered in the same sophistication-meets-slapstick style.  The core of the show is a roomful – a suite really – of works from this period, full of tipsy cavorting and gunplay, appended with self-explanatory titles like A bunch of us boys were whooping it up in the Malamute Saloon (1966). They feel steeped in cinematic male fantasies of sex and violence, thankfully leavened by humour, gendered self-mockery, a general sense of knowing oafishness. By 1981’s Card Players, things are bawdier. A clothed man plays cards with a naked woman – shades of the famous photo of Duchamp playing chess with Eve Babitz – while two other nudes prop up the bar. Sardonic works like Feel Like a Hundred Bucks (1986), a painting of a ripped-up banknote with an oval mirror in its centre, don’t recall anyone and stand as out-of-time Pop.  The show’s strangest and most diverting work might be Saturday Night at the Movies (1985), an interlocking mix of depictions of men’s shirts and trousers, bits of city architecture, a horned red-eyed man and myriad miniature half-naked figures scrambling about, as if escaped from one of Copley’s bars. (The gramophones that often feature in his saloon scenes reappear here.) There are touches of Öyvind Fahlstrom and Hariton Pushwagner in this work, and a frisson of consumerist critique, but the painting mostly fascinates because of its recalcitrant opacity. Much else on display boils American culture down to a vast, rambunctious, perpetually humming machinery of desire, one that might get you shot by your wife, poisoned by your husband or shitfaced in the whorehouse – all those scenarios play out here – but which was approximately as true during the 1960s as it was in the Wild West. Because Copley never really rendered his own time but filtered Americana through French modernist aesthetics and cartoons, his work isn’t pinned to the moment of its making. It likely looked brazenly askew back then; today, in an age of identitarian art where the hangups of straight white males are rightly being downgraded, it does so again.   The Ballad of William N. Copley, Galerie Max Hetzler, Berlin, 17 January – 7 March 2020
ArtReview℗Larry Achiampong at John Hansard Gallery, Southampton℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗J.J. Charlesworth unpacks discussions of race, labour and identity politics in recent works by the British-Ghanian artist℗The past and the future of race, the experience of African diaspora and the relationship of history to identity drive Larry Achiampong’s When the Sky Falls, in which childhood biography spirals quickly into reflections on bigger political realities.  Versions of the artist’s PAN AFRICAN FLAG FOR THE RELIC TRAVELLERS’ ALLIANCE (MOTION) (2018) – motifs of red, yellow and green bands around a black disc, alongside 54 black stars (for each African country) – adorn the façade of the gallery. These relate to Achiampong’s recent Relic films (2017–), in which a future united Africa sends out ‘relic travellers’ to scour a ruined West, collecting oral testimonies of those once oppressed by its disappeared civilisation. Africa’s precolonial past is projected towards a postcolonial future.  The narrator of the videowork Sunday’s Best (2016) recalls his childhood puzzlement over the fact that the only image of a white man in his home was a picture of ‘white Jesus’. A rapid, barely legible sequence of images, referring to colonial rule, Christianity and racisms old and new, is followed by scenes of the interior of a Victorian Gothic church, as the narrator remembers his evangelical Christian upbringing: the charismatic pastor, the rapturous, all-day worship, the threadbare meeting hall.  He goes on to muse on the names used for Jesus – Jesu Christo, but also Nyame – while a black woman, dressed in vividly patterned traditional dress appears, ghostlike, singing passionately in the staid English church. The use of Nyame – the god of Ashanti religion – leads the narrator to conclude that his congregation’s forms of worship had little to do with European Christianity transposed to Africa, but were rather the submerged traces of Ashanti culture, carried through a long century, from the time of the Ashanti uprising against British rule in 1900, in what is present-day Ghana.  If Sunday’s Best rescues diasporic identity from historical erasure, The Expulsion (2019) crackles with indignation over continued inequality. As its narrator recalls accompanying his mother to nighttime cleaning jobs in London offices during the 1990s, the film follows a black woman as she mops and dusts gloomy interiors. She is one of the ‘twilight people’, ‘hidden from the white-collar types’, ‘invisible’ labourers who nightly perform the ‘expulsion’ of dirt from boardrooms in which the wealthy ‘dictate our future’. Achiampong’s narrator loathes this drudgery, while observing that his white working-class classmates and their parents have it better than his family. His mother’s advice is every migrant’s aspirational escape: ‘Make sure you excel’.  As for us, the audience, we watch The Expulsion sitting on office chairs, surrounded by potted palms, watched in turn by a gathering of ‘Henry’ vacuum cleaners – the ones with the smiley, slightly sinister, upward-looking eyes. By this, Achiampong deftly offers a moment of institutional critique, looping the narrative back into the gallery space. If the narrator is Achiampong, then the artist of the present has indeed ‘escaped’: to the art gallery, with the cultural capital this position offers, to both the artist and us, the audience. Yet we know that come closing time, the ‘twilight people’ will clock in, and that cleaning galleries pays the same as cleaning offices.  If there’s an art-historical echo in The Expulsion, it might be The Nightcleaners, a 1975 documentary by the Berwick Street Film Collective; a vision of low-waged nightwork seen through the lens of gender – white and black women fighting male bosses and male-dominated unions. The Expulsion is more bleakly resigned to such social divisions, while class solidarities fade behind the surer focus on ethnicity and race. But the question for that future Africa may still be: will the pay be better? Larry Achiampong, When the Sky Falls, John Hansard Gallery, Southampton, 25 January – 21 March
ArtReview℗Cameron Rowland at Institute of Contemporary Arts, London℗Chris Fite-Wassilak℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Chris Fite-Wassilak unpicks the double bind in Cameron Rowland’s exhibition addressing the legacies of slavery in contemporary Britain – through 12 April ℗There are ghosts haunting the ICA, crowded into the mostly empty rooms of Cameron Rowland’s first solo exhibition in the UK: those of countless people captured and abused in the British slave trade from the seventeenth century onwards, as well as the numerous merchants and clerks in the UK who processed and administered the industry. But foremost here is the spectre of Rowland himself, in the role of an exasperated history teacher. The primary element of this show is the handout, which contains a densely footnoted essay, in which Rowland posits the institutions of slavery as foundational to the British state, informing the police, prison and financial institutions that followed. The abolition of slavery in 1833 was primarily enabled, he states, by the wealthy players of the trade to avoid taxes, and changed nothing: ‘Abolition preserved the property established by slavery’.  The exhibition comprises a few scant historical objects dotting the main gallery, effectively illustrating this text, each with lengthy explanatory captions: Guineas (all works 2020), a framed two-guinea piece, made from gold mined in Africa; Credit, a small eighteenth-century mahogany desk mounted on the wall at waist height (a gesture towards the bureaucracy that enabled the transatlantic trade), made from wood derived from British colonies in the Caribbean. In the middle of the floor is Pacotille, a pile of bonelike beads and U-shaped bits of oxidised brass – objects that were used as a one-way trade for slaves, that ‘Europeans would offer as payment but would never accept’. These are resonant and harrowing – but perhaps better contextualised in, say, Liverpool’s International Slavery Museum or the Museum of London Docklands.  Alongside this minimal presentation are two transactions that form the more conceptual backbone of the show. Mooring is a yearlong rental agreement for a boat mooring at the Albert Docks in East London, apparently the location of a former warehouse for Rathbone &amp; Sons, a timber merchant who in 1784 was the first to import raw cotton from the US. The mooring is intended to remain empty for a year. More elusively, Encumbrance is a series of five works (represented in the gallery by framed legal documents) in which the ICA has mortgaged several mahogany doors, doorways and handrails in the building to a company Rowland has set up. The ICA leases its premises from the Crown Estate; their deal with Rowland effectively makes the property worth a little less. At a point when racist and neoimperial rhetoric is swelling in the UK, the legacies of slavery do need to be brought more publicly into the present. But are an empty mooring, some artefacts and withholding a bit of cash from the royal family the means to achieve that? This, only a few metres from Buckingham Palace, an epicentre of wealth enabled by faith and given the protective veneer of legality (and who also must have surely been in on Encumbrance’s mortgage deal to approve it).  There’s a double bind in Rowland’s work, where a desire to reveal the spectres of the past lurking in the present is smothered by a historical determinism, where history is a path to which we are unwittingly bound – as one-directional as the intended transactions of the ‘pacotille’ strewn on the floor. His legal transactions are symbolic gestures of reparation, counteractions to the contracts, affidavits and paper money that came out of slavery; bureaucratic acts that were themselves originally symbolic gestures, accruing enough belief to be enforced and perpetuated. It seems his teachable point is that we are all already underwritten, our fate was signed away several centuries ago. It’s this belief that Rowland only ends up reinforcing, resigned to reinvest in the power of paperwork.   Cameron Rowland, 3 &amp; 4 Will. IV c. 73, ICA, London, 29 January – 12 April From the March 2020 issue of ArtReview
ArtReview℗Luca Vitone at Centro Pecci, Prato℗Barbara Casavecchia℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Barbara Casavecchia gets swept up in the artist’s visual odyssey to ‘Romanistan’ ℗Eppur si muove (‘And yet it moves’) is a sardonic Italian saying, originally attributed to Galileo Galilei in 1633, at the end of his trial for heresy by the Inquisition, which forced him to proclaim the Earth as the stationary centre of the universe and sentenced him to perpetual immobility (ie, house imprisonment for life). Since the early 2000s, Luca Vitone has used Eppur si muove as the collective title for an ongoing series of installations, sculptures and works on paper in which freedom of thought and movement are represented by his encounters with the nomadism of Roma culture. Romanistan groups them, but also inscribes them in a broader ‘nostos narrative’ (nostos being the Greek word for ‘homecoming’), an odyssey across space and time that is both collective and private, and infused with nostalgia (nostos + algos, ‘the pain associated with longing’). The exhibition reflects a number of journeys. The foremost is the migration of the Roma and Sinti people from India to Europe; Vitone recently reversed it by travelling by camper van from Bologna (where Roma are cited in an o cial document from 1422) to Chandigarh (where the first international centre of documentation on Roma opened in 1970). He was joined by a group of friends guided by the Roma musician, musicologist and lecturer Santino Spinelli and his son Gennaro. During the trip the artist shot a road movie (Romanistan, 2019), screened once a day in the museum’s cinema, while a monumental video projection in the exhibition space condenses this to a short loop (Romanistan (Video), 2019). The film is often silent, with long tracking shots of the landscapes flowing outside the window, from the Mediterranean and the Balkans to the Caucasus and beyond. As in Vitone’s signature ‘atopic maps’, where the conventions of cartography are replaced by personal notations on what makes a site ‘specific’ (Carta atopica (Atopic Map), 1988–92, is on display), landmarks remain unmarked, such as the prehistoric stone circle of Carahunge (‘speaking stones’), in southern Armenia, where the wind blows through circular holes pierced atop the megaliths, possibly to observe the same solar trajectories studied by Galileo. The stops along the road are punctuated by interviews with Roma politicians, activists, musicians and academics who voice their opinions on Roma culture, identity and discrimination. The term ‘Romanistan’ was originally coined by the Bulgarian activist, theatre director and politician Manush Romanov to describe an imagined country formed by all the Romanes-speaking peoples.   In another rearward journey, the show traces Vitone’s practice back to 1994, when he involved Cologne’s Roma community in his exhibition Der unbestimmte Ort (The Unspecified Place) at Galerie Christian Nagel. A wall is painted green (land) and blue (sky), a red wooden cartwheel at the centre – the Roma flag. The photographic diptych Eppur si Muove (Alba) (2005) documents the donation of a plot of land by Situationist artist Giuseppe Pinot-Gallizio to Sinti families in 1956, so that they could legally reside within the borders of his city (Alba, in Piedmont).  The third journey is very much a sentimental one. In 1977 a teenage Vitone embarked on a family car trip from Genoa to Iran. The driver was his father, the artist and poet Rodolfo Vitone, now recently deceased and evoked by a pair of old leather sandals, cast in bronze (Romanistan #3, 2019). During his trip to Chandigarh, Vitone decided to put himself literally in his dad’s shoes, by wearing them, and to keep in touch with his teenage son Leo by sending him 11 postcards from all the countries he visited (Romanistan (Postcards), 2019). To close a circle, and then move on. 
ArtReview℗Vaivém at Centro Cultural Banco do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro℗Oliver Basciano℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Oliver Basciano swings between varying interpretations in a group exhibition exploring the cultural, political and economic history of the hammock℗In Duhigó’s Nepũ Arquepũ, a 2019 acrylic-on-wood painting, a woman starts a month of postpartum recovery in a hammock strung across the beams of a straw-roofed, mud-floored maloca. The naked young mother cradles her newborn as the local shaman of the Tukano tribe, an indigenous people of the Northwest Amazon, sits close by, administering blessings and medicine. It is a touching, strange scene, one of many such moments in Vaivém, curator Raphael Fonseca’s densely researched cultural, political and economic history of the hammock. With exhibits ranging from arte popular to Lina Bo Bardi’s 1948 tripod chair (which features a single piece of leather strung on an iron frame), as well as contemporary works by indigenous and non-indigenous artists, colonial painting and historic documents, he uses this subject to swing round some of the most pertinent curatorial questions of our moment, not least indigeneity, cultural appropriation and the hangover of imperialism.  A series of semiabstract acrylic paintings by Yermollay Caripoune describe the Caripuna origin myth of the hammock: following the death of a baby shortly after birth, Temerõ, the creator, appears in a vision and teaches the mother how to harvest thread and weave hammock fabric, attach lanyards and anchors, decorate with a trim and suspend from a tree – a cocoon in which to keep future offspring safe, presumably. The fact that birth features in so many works here is testament to the central place the hammock occupies in indigenous life. A curatorial text alongside Isael Maxakali and Juninho Maxakali’s series of paintings depicting the process of extracting cecropia fibre, a material used in weaving, notes that the cecropia tree is known as the ‘mother tree’. In both Claudia Andujar’s photographs of Yanomami people, young and old, asleep between tree trunks, and Maureen Bisilliat’s photographs of Indigenous People in Xingu from the 1970s, naked flesh is enveloped and camouflaged by the fabric, imagining hammocks as extensions of the body.  It is a fraught journey from rainforest to urban living room, and from these idyllic beginnings the exhibition takes a darker turn. Johann Moritz Rugendas’s 1850 oil on canvas depicts a wealthy white woman in a blue dress fanning herself while being carried in a hammock by two black men. A sculpture by Aline Baiana titled Expropriation (2016) consists of a hammock loosely woven with barbed wire; an allusion, albeit unsubtle, to the occupation of indigenous lands that continues today. Denilson Baniwa burlesques questions of exoticisation in Voyeurs (2019), a digital collage in which smartphone cameras are trained on a traditionally line-drawn Amerindian family.  While the colonial powers appropriated its design for their own leisure, the hammock also became a racialised symbol of laziness. Fonseca includes plates from Mário de Andrade’s 1928 book Macunaíma, in which the titular indigenous antihero, ‘jet black’ and born to the ‘virgin jungle’, spends most of his time loafing. Elsewhere, Disney comics featuring José Carioca are displayed. The Rio-dwelling parrot, a feathered friend to Donald Duck, was funded by the Roosevelt government as part of attempts to spread US imperialism south. The bird, whose laziness is offset by his sly cleverness, is invariably shown reclining as he schemes.  Vaivém is a sprawling, comprehensive affair, and while the hammock is the central motif, it is more a MacGuffin through which Fonseca explores his hot-button themes. The exhibition could have collapsed under its own weight, yet though it took me several hours to tour, I didn’t tire once. Vaivém (To-and-fro), Centro Cultural Banco do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro, 27 November 2019 – 17 February 2020
ArtReview℗Donna Huddleston at Drawing Room, London℗Kathryn Lloyd℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗In a series of new drawings, the Irish artist captures transitory moments, writes Kathryn Lloyd ℗Often depicting groups of young women, Donna Huddleston’s drawings distil fluctuating and formative states, such as the transition from adolescence into adulthood, into the stillness of a tableau vivant. For her first solo show in the UK, the Irish-Australian artist has turned to her own biography, weaving narratives from her time as a student of theatre design together with fragments and images by Anton Chekhov, Raphael, Diego Velázquez and Tennessee Williams. The result is a body of work that is carefully staged even as it reflects on what it means to stage life in art.  The focal point of the exhibition is the titular drawing (all works 2019), which is over 2m wide. Made up of eight sheets of paper, it is arranged on a freestanding wall that is placed in front of a series of fabric acoustic wall panels of the type used in theatres. The composition is borrowed from Raphael’s similarly sized The Deposition (1507), but in Huddleston’s reworking, Christ is replaced by a young woman who has collapsed into the arms of those around her, a dripping paintbrush in her splayed hand calling to mind bleeding stigmata. Mary Magdalene is played by a woman with a face covered in freckles or scalelike marks, her pale-yellow hair encasing her head like an immovable wooden wig. In contrast to the Magdalene’s desperate, clutching distress at Christ’s dead body, this woman looks over the student with a distanced, clinical expression: she holds her listless hand as if checking her own pulse.  The figures are built up through layers of coloured pencil, and their clothes give the impression of having gone through the wash too many times, the original vibrancy of colour bleached out. Expressions are conveyed through theatrical signifiers: a hand raised to the mouth, the whites of eyeballs visible as they roll backwards. Huddleston builds personality through detail: a dated beret, a pencil behind the ear, bloodshot eyes, nail varnish colour, wrinkles. In The Call a woman holds a rotary telephone to her ear with a dramatically crooked bend of the elbow, her brow furrowed in anguish. Her laboured performance acts out the significance of the call but divulges nothing else. Focusing on gesture and ritual, the artist rinses her scenes of any deeper signification, presenting them back to us as pure affectation.  More references to theatre and art history arise throughout the carefully coded works in this exhibition. The frontal gaze and structured dress in The Call are reminiscent of Velázquez’s Las Meninas (1656), while the scaly, lizardlike print of her outfit nods to Williams’s 1961 play The Night of the Iguana, quotes from which the artist incorporates into her enigmatic exhibition text. Although the scenes they depict are static, these drawings never quite settle. Instead they evoke a feverish, dreamlike state in which the separation between theatre and life might collapse for a ‘suffering’ student exhausted by their own ambition. Slipping between self-parody and sincerity, The Exhausted Student is a wry study of creative labour, sacrifice and ambition.   Donna Huddleston, The Exhausted Student, Drawing Room, London, 28 November 2019 – 1 March 2020
ArtReview℗Tschabalala Self at Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston℗Megan N. Liberty℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗The American artist offers a multifaceted depiction of black urban life in the US - writes Megan N. Liberty℗Tschabalala Self’s figures cannot be confined to the canvases onto which they are painted and stitched. The fabric wrinkles, bunches and moves into three-dimensional space; pieces of cloth hang over the edge of the stretcher; she even paints figures directly on the gallery walls. Incorporating patterned and hand-printed fabrics, paint, pencil, socks and plastic bags, her works draw on her experience growing up in Harlem to present a mixed-media and multifaceted depiction of black urban life in the United States.  Out of Body (2015) – from which this solo exhibition derives its title – depicts two figures, one with brown skin and the other with turquoise. Both are shadowed by ghostly,dark-brown silhouettes. The turquoise woman’s torso and upper thighs are clad in a bright yellow found fabric with a printed pattern of strawberryfilled baskets, while her outstretched hands display matching blue nails. Her companion’s one visible hand (portrayed in a blue patterned fabric) presents sharp orange nails while her foot is clad in a black-and-white floral pattern, like a sock.  These details complicate the resemblance of these voluptuous figures –.protruding butts, breasts and lips – to caricatures of black women. Rather than refute those representations, Self’s work reclaims them by using signifiers including patterned fabrics to convey individual personality, taste and preference within specific cultural constructs. These fully formed women seem to emerge out of the doubled, monochrome and generic brown figures behind them. This small survey show spans three galleries with fourteen works on canvas, four sculptures, and wall paintings, arranged by theme rather than chronology. Ol’Bay (2019) shows a woman standing nude in a space that can be identified as a kitchen by a square of fabric adorned with images of teapots, plates and cookware. This is the fabric, according to the exhibition wall text, from which Self’s mother fabricated the curtains in her childhood apartment. The shelves are lined with cans of Goya and La Morena-brand beans, familiar from the bodegas that Self recreates in her Bodega Run series of installations – which replicates these corner shops and social spaces in the gallery – while the title namechecks the Cajun spice that is a signature of the cuisine of Self’s home neighbourhood.  While a bodega installation is not included in the show, many related works are. Next to Ol’Bay is Racer (2018), showing the back of a man squatting down to examine a wall of Tide bottles hand-printed onto the canvas. On the back of his jacket, the same brand of bottle is rendered as a logo made out of collaged and hand-painted fabrics. On the other side of the same gallery, Thank You (2018) uses the same hand-printed Tide backdrop, while the centre of the room is occupied by two Milkcrate (2019) sculptures, outsize duplications of the containers familiar from bodegas. In the gallery, they are elevated to the status of plinths on which Self has placed two wire-and-plaster-gauze sculptures of legs. They are painted in a shade of purple matching the figures rendered directly onto the wall, whose legs spread out behind the canvases.  The references in Self’s paintings suggest an attempt to memorialise the culture of the Black and Hispanic communities increasingly displaced by New York’s gentrification. And so the woman in the painting stands looking over her shoulder at the viewer, asking us to look at her, and to acknowledge her body and the materials by which she is surrounded as the proper subject of art.   Tschabalala Self, Out of Body, Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston 20 January – 5 July 2020
ArtReview℗Stan Douglas at Victoria Miro Wharf Road, London℗Nina Power℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Nina Power sees double when viewing life from the consummate filmmaker&#x27;s perspective℗For many today, the world seems backward. The right talks online about a ‘clown world’, dominated by liberal values in which everything is upside-down and absurd in equal measure. The left, meanwhile, mourns the election of those they see as clowns, wondering why their progressive ideas are not more popular. The question of perspective as such is left open: where we see things from is rarely itself explored. Art, on the other hand, is nothing other than a perspective on the world – it is here we see how we see, and take a step back, or closer, to understanding how the world, or the cosmos, is framed.  In Doppelgänger, Stan Douglas’s double square-format video installation (first presented at last year’s Venice Biennale), viewable in the dark from both sides, we are in the space-age proper: generic technology and a global cast take us out of, or at least beyond, contemporary partisan politics for a while. An astronaut, Alice, a black woman in her forties, is teleported to a distant planet (or, perhaps, through the looking glass). In one version of the story she returns to her space station with her colleagues; in the other, she arrives backwards, her organs on the wrong side of her body, her passwords reversed, her very being under suspicion: she is quarantined and put under guard, mistrusted as a potential ‘terrorist’ whose continued existence becomes a matter of speculation. The same people who greet her in one version fear her in another: your relation to others is always a matter of perspective and who decides if you’re in or out. The individual emotional psychologising of Andrei Tarkovsky’s 1972 Solaris is here transplanted to relations within groups.  Douglas’s film plays with questions of ethics – is Alice one or two? What is her relation to her double? Are they clones or sisters? – but more profoundly with questions of communication. When reversed, Alice gets a password ‘wrong’, spoken from the ‘incorrect’ side: to the question ‘if you measure your life by the tick of the clock’, instead of the answer ‘[you] live reified time’ she replies ‘emit deifier evil’; all correct words, certainly, but backwards. This simple act of miscommunication, as much of our dialogue with one another ultimately comprises, reflects the recto-verso paradox of perspective: there is no neutral position from which to judge. Douglas throws in a nod to quantum theory, as well as to the native-settler dynamic in North America, in a joke made by one of the space station crew, who compares the colonisers’ obsessions with ‘aliens’ to their inability to accept their own colonisation of North America.  Douglas the cinematographer is a consummate framer; everything is just so, from the lamp in the quarantine suite to the seatbelts and clipboard on the spaceship. The work’s form – forward-backward, looped, double-storied, paralleled but different narratives, clones, copies and reversals, issues of right and wrong – creates the overall impression of zero gravity, a nearweightless commentary on the absence of a centre. Doppelgänger reformulates Leibniz’s question ‘why is there something rather than nothing?’ as ‘why are there two things rather than one?’, and this double-sidedness then spins off into a cosmic fantasia with moments of stark beauty; not least in the images of celestial voids, double planets, a delightful soundtrack and kaleidoscopic images of space-parachutes landing into water. In viewing Alice’s two stories next to each other, we are made to understand that we are always opposite, or alien, to someone else, and they, in turn, are different to us. What is surprising is that we ever, left or right, see things the same way: perhaps we do not.  Stan Douglas, Doppelgänger, Victoria Miro Wharf Road, London, 31 January – 14 March 2020
ArtReview℗Marine Hugonnier at Ingleby Gallery, Edinburgh℗Susannah Thompson℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Susannah Thompson tracks an image’s journey as laid out by the philosopher-turned-artist ℗Image caption: Pan Am Argentina | Housed in Ingleside, Illinois – 16.05.2012 (left), Pan Am Argentina | Housed in Detroit, Michigan – 12.03.2010 (right), part of the community of 12 occurrences of appearance bound by a search on the internet in between 27 and 29 November 2019, c-prints, 175 × 117 cm (each). © design by Chermayeff and Geismar, 1971. © photography by Elliott Erwitt / Magnum Photos. Courtesy the artist and Ingleby Gallery, Edinburgh The three buildings occupied by Ingleby Gallery over the past 22 years have always presented a challenge to critics. The immaculate and elegant interiors are so distractingly beautiful that it can be hard to see artworks at all. Ingleby’s new home was designed and built as the Meeting House of the Glasites, an austere eighteenth-century Scottish sect whose beliefs included the view that beauty and art were inherently corrupt – followers of the Reverend John Glas were forbidden to indulge in superfluous decoration or art of any kind. It is ironic that their place of worship is now a gallery, though the building’s iconoclastic history makes it a fitting site for new works by Marine Hugonnier, an anthropologist and philosopher turned artist, whose career has centred on the politics of representation and image-making.  Hugonnier is primarily known as a filmmaker for works such as the trilogy Ariana (2003), The Last Tour (2004) and Travelling Amazonia (2006), and her Travel Posters continue The Last Tour’s examination of the tourist gaze through a series of large-format images of Ivan Chermayeff and Tom Geismar’s iconic 1971–72 Pan Am advertising campaigns. Using existing Magnum photographs, the designers created exotic, evocative jet-age posters of travel destinations. They suggest rather than depict the countries they represent: there are no identifiable landmarks or travel advertising tropes such as traditional dress, exotic animals or local cuisine. The works evoke the romance of travel itself, eliciting desire and dreams of escape, and rather than acting as an illustration of the country name (spelled out in Helvetica at the top or bottom of each poster), the hazy, distant images of sunsets, seas and lush foliage are contemplative, allowing the viewer a level of associative agency unusual in design of the period.  In re-presenting these works as her own, the exhibition might appear as latter-day appropriation art – the Argentina works in particular seem to invite this comparison: ochre-hued cowboys against a huge setting sun. Yet Hugonnier reroutes these assumptions. Alongside the originals (provided by the designers themselves) are similar, but not identical iterations. Hugonnier presents the works as c-prints encased in custom-made Perspex box frames: three of Hawaii, three of South America and five of Argentina. Hugonnier has stalked the images’ passage from object to data, charting the ‘journey’ of the posters over decades by finding and comparing apparently identical versions of the posters online. Close analysis of changes in the data of the images allowed her to trace where and when specific works had been uploaded – the resulting differences in hue, tone and resolution across various iterations are revealed when the works are hung together. In the case of Hawaii, the additional pixilation almost enhances the meditative effect of surfers immersed in a shimmering sea. Titles become itineraries of the works’ journey: Pan Am Hawaii / Housed in Palo Alto, California – 06.09.2015 (2019), for example, was one of 12 found in a restricted two-day internet search.  But though Hugonnier’s intervention and ‘compare and contrast’ detective work facilitates and increases our appreciation of the works and their travels, it is Chermaye. and Geismar’s singular, nostalgic designs that ultimately hold our attention. As John Glas cautioned, images have the power to undermine ideas. Beauty can lead us astray. In a windowless room, lit by a large cupola, the shimmering posters transport us to places far beyond Edinburgh and the head-turning space of the gallery.   Marine Hugonnier: Travel Posters, Ingleby Gallery, Edinburgh, 1 February – 28 March 2020
ArtReview℗Gabriel Kuri at Wiels, Brussels℗Pádraic E. Moore℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗℗A preoccupation with ordering and indexing is conspicuous throughout Gabriel Kuri’s survey show at Wiels. The urge to tabulate is palpable as a rationale behind discrete pieces, but also in the Mexican artist’s overarching conceit, which entails arranging all works in the exhibition (numbering over 60) into four categories: metal, paper, plastic and the more heterogeneous ‘construction materials’. Navigating the exhibition, one has the cumulative sense that Kuri’s compulsion to sort (and resort) is rooted in a desire to interrogate ‘civilisation’ by scrutinising the substances that make up its infrastructures. Many works in the show could be described as assisted readymades; found elements alchemically combined so as to transcend their original function and assume new metaphorical lives. In this sense, much of Kuri’s oeuvre evokes Pierre Restany’s definition of Nouveau Réalisme (as outlined in that group’s 1960 manifesto) as the ‘poetic recycling of urban, industrial and advertising reality’. Another strategy frequently adopted by the artist entails fabricating enlarged replicas of quotidian objects related to financial exchange, such as his upscaled till receipts (here transformed into tapestries) or plastic bread clips. In reconstructing the administrative detritus of commerce, Kuri combines ethnographic analysis with formalist concerns. A particularly successful aspect of this show is how the schema responds to the postindustrial architecture of Wiels, whose galleries vary in size. The scale of the human body, and its role as a vital conduit in the cycles of consumerism, are constant foci in Kuri’s output: this is touched upon in Complementary cornice and intervals (2009), an array of miniature toiletry products gleaned from various hotels, balanced atop slabs of variegated marble. Yet moments of monumentalism also punctuate the exhibition, as exemplified by .)(. (2013), consisting of a skip and a curved sheet of metal, both tipped upright and pinioned by the weight of two boulders. The central positioning of this edifice, which relies upon counterforce to keep it upright, is significant. Its seemingly haphazard contingency radiates volatility onto all of the surrounding artworks. Precarity also emanates from Untitled (Charted Missing Data) (2016), inflated condoms nestled into a honeycomb slate structure and displayed on a stainless-steel table. This assemblage instantly evokes a cross section of an insect colony; the tightly inflated latex membranes possessing a distinctly larval appearance. The material Kuri ‘denatured’ to greatest effect, however, is hard cash, which appears throughout the show in various guises. In some instances money is presented in a manner that elevates its inherent worth while also highlighting its aesthetic properties, as in Box for Four (2014), in which wads of colour-coded notes are lodged inside a minimalist stainless steel cube. Elsewhere currency is presented as something disposable, abject and orphaned from the circuits of exchange that conceived it. The immersive installation Donation Box (2010–19) comprises vast expanses of sand, stretching across the gallery floor and speckled with cigarette butts and one- and two-cent copper coins. Belgium recently followed the example of several eurozone nations in discontinuing the circulation of these coins, having deduced that they were too costly to produce. More copper coinage appears in Broken Line (2011), scattered like bird droppings under an elegant armature studded with hostile antipigeon spikes. Here, money and waste are conflated, currency cast as filthy lucre. Although Kuri’s work is anchored in materiality and engaged in an art-historical dialogue (with postminimal sculpture in particular), it is his ability to give form to invisible realities that imbues his art with relevance. Without didacticism, he asserts that the fabric of society is shaped by abstract, unseen transactions that hold the power to make the value of everything – even money – mutable. Gabriel Kuri, sorted, resorted, Wiels, Brussels, 6 September – 5 January 2020
ArtReview℗Jannis Marwitz at Dortmunder Kunstverein℗Moritz Scheper℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗In the painter’s motif-filled scenes, Moritz Scheper glimpses something of the Old Masters℗A ‘continuous shock’ is an oxymoron, since shocks are defined by their singularity. And yet such a notion, or that of a steady succession of shocks, is appropriate to Jannis Marwitz’s painting. The Brussels-based artist’s earlier trompe l’oeils of stone grave plates from Greco-Roman antiquity, disturbingly painted in bright, contrasting colours, demanded strong reactions. Of late, though, Marwitz has turned to a mashup of styles, from Late Gothic Flemish painting to the Italian Renaissance. His provocation lies in the anachronistic depiction and vulgar genre-hopping, playing with the styles of the Old Masters without copying them. Instead of placing the old on a pedestal, the artist is mischievously reworking it, like wet clay.  In the palm-size, precisely painted Untitled (all works but one 2019), a pensive adolescent, his physiognomy redolent of Flemish Old Master painting, is washed around by waves; a crab pulls his tongue, a sea snake winds around him, a green, witchlike figure pinches his cheek. Water, billowing grey clouds, skin, the fall of the folds – the texture-rich composition is a cluster of painterly porn in the tightest of spaces. Especially enigmatic are two reddish bars, one on the boy’s forehead and the other on his breastbone. Their shape evokes bricks or girders, yet their consistency seems anything but solid. Everything here appears soft, floppy, liquefied, giving the painted world a puzzling instability.  Directly adjacent, and in close correspondence, is the large-format Die Frösche (The Frogs). Against an elegiac background of clouds and hills we again find a young man, maybe the same one, menaced by two geese and an enormous beaky bird, which, again, pulls his tongue. In comparison to the landscape, the figure of the youth appears gigantic, or far above it; in relation to the birds, he seems dwarfish. The composition gives the impression of an allegory, its meaning withheld from us by our ignorance of ancient lore. This sense is enhanced by the fact that a version of this painting recently appeared in another show by the artist at Sundy, London, as if the motif were a popular one, understandable to different audiences.  It’s interesting to consider the clustering of feathers and beaks in Die Frösche in relation to another untitled work: a bob-haired young woman sitting with a pretzel in hand, a quilted jacket hung on the back of her chair. The painting depicts Marwitz’s partner, artist Christiane Blattmann, in whose own works – made of burlap and silicone – feathers, wings and beaks appear as leitmotifs. It’s painted in a completely different register to the others, with shades of Neue Sachlichkeit (Germany’s 1920s New Objectivity movement). So Marwitz again employs the patina of a historical style, activating the viewer’s emotional attitude to and knowledge of this era, though the painting remains hard to decode. Instead, the different yet connected temporal layers – rustic interior and shiny quilted jacket – grind against each other.  While images appear in different variations, certain motifs and gestures recur. The goose returns in Poacher, a large canvas depicting a muscular man with a fish on his back, another favoured Marwitz motif. The head of the fisherman, which brings to mind antique representations of Heracles and looks strangely superimposed, repeats identically in a different painting, depicting a group of three (Poachers). Such moments of recognition help build a tight web of connections among the paintings, albeit adding up to a mysterious, vague muttering. Even though Marwitz surfs the history of his medium, availing himself of various styles and techniques long superseded (his paintings hang anachronistically from thick wire), every canvas is a jamais-vu. As a viewer you get a glimpse of how paintings might have worked when they were still seen in sacred contexts.  Jannis Marwitz, Narch Till June / Närz bis April, Dortmunder Kunstverein, 23 November 2019 – 9 February 2020
ArtReview℗Miriam Cahn at Museum of Modern Art, Warsaw℗Phoebe Blatton℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Phoebe Blatton finds something close to empathy in the Swiss painter’s show of abstracted figures℗Ambiguously positioned between pleasure and pain, perpetrator and victim, numerous figures in extremis feature in Miriam Cahn’s first retrospective in Poland, I As Human. Taken from Cahn’s automatic writings, this statement confuses the subject/object, and the idea that everyone or thing, to allude to a specific work’s title, couldbeme. In this 2017 work the Swiss artist paints a veiled woman and child in a gridded, barren landscape appearing to flee as two men advance gripping their penises, or the bloody place where one once was.  A sense of peril extends beyond the obviously ‘human’. In a frenzy of chalk, megalopolis (1987) peers down on a modern cityscape, teeming with phallic architecture. classic(al) loving (état de guerre / state of war) (1983) comprises ten quickfire abstract drawings horizontally applied to the wall, evoking a filmstrip, and expresses Cahn’s experience of harassment on a train. Featuring hanging breasts and an apelike face, mammal (1998) is a more subtly volatile work, exemplifying how Cahn, as she’s said, ‘dissolve[s] the oilpaintingness, just as previously I dissolved the so-called drawing-ness through the sheer size and quantity’. Its gaseous surface speaks to the slippery spectrum upon which mammals (a word that has its origin in ‘of the breast’) are ascribed subjectivity.  Born in 1949 to Jewish immigrants fleeing Nazi persecution, Cahn became a peace-movement activist and a feminist, notably withdrawing her work from Documenta 7 in 1982 following what she purportedly considered unfair treatment by director Rudi Fuchs. (She made a celebrated return in 2017’s 14th edition.) Cahn’s history is often evoked to elucidate her ‘radical empathy’ (to quote a term used by the exhibition’s public programme curator Natalia Sielewicz), and as ‘a document of my helplessness’ (in Cahn’s words), her work is an undoubtedly sincere interrogation of the ever-emmeshed personal and political. But how does it play to an audience increasingly desensitised to violent imagery, yet sensitised to more oblique structural violence and privilege?  decay (2017) might be a self-portrait, and depicts a white female figure grimacing at us, with cartoonish red-rimmed eyes, bald head bent forward at a cruel right angle, a fist clenched. In blackwomanwarrior (2018) a black woman’s face is further abstracted in the modernist ‘primitive’ style, and the genitals are notably exaggerated. The argument that Cahn schematises all bodies through varying degrees of abstraction doesn’t prevent me reading this painting as another manifestation of the crass, violating tropes that white spectators have historically inflicted on black bodies, regardless of other intersectional experience.  In the cavernous white cube of the Museum of Modern Art’s temporary pavilion, I feel coerced into this sense of unilaterality by Cahn’s self-directed hang. Eschewing any division of the space, the nonchronological, salon-style presentation, which includes sculpture and digital media, feels conceptually heavy-handed in its choruslike approach. A series of 31 colour-treated scans, including Second World War aerial photographs of concentration camps, comprise processing (2019). It strikes a particularly bum note as I squint up at the images set high above other works, these harrowingly real apertures into mass annihilation reduced to motifs, even if that was the point. I am drawn back to the more liminal paintings and drawings, notably the radioactive emptiness of the blue house (1992) in pigment and charcoal, a vast tonal chalk drawing of a bed (1981), appearing mundane yet aggressive and isolated, and geology (2017), a panorama in oils of the Swiss mountains as viewed from Cahn’s window, thrumming with Douglas Sirkian drama and portent. Suggesting something queer in the quotidian, these works become portals through which disquieting associations might channel, and ferment in the manner of her ‘dissolving’ surfaces. Here, I feel something akin to empathy.   Miriam Cahn, I As Human, Museum of Modern Art, Warsaw, 29 November 2019 – 1 March 2020 
ArtReview℗Sick Time, Sleepy Time, Crip Time at Red Bull Arts Detroit℗Rahel Aima℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗A group show on the realities of health and care impresses Rahel Aima with its commitment ℗In a former Detroit brewery, I have a rare experience of joy. I am half-submerged in a bed of black beans, surrounded by Mylar emergency blankets tented like a golden crown, feeling the tension drain out of my body. Fannie Sosa and Navild Acosta’s installation Black Power Naps: Black Bean Bed and Altar to the Ancestors (2018) is about racialised sleep debt, or the unequal distribution of sleep among different populations: the whiter and wealthier you are, the better you sleep at night. Alongside is a small altar and an accompanying zine with pieces on sleep equity and rest as reparations; the artists have requested, through wall text, that only persons of colour take copies.  The installation is part of Sick Time, Sleepy Time, Crip Time: Against Capitalism’s Temporal Bullying, curated by Taraneh Fazeli and housed at Red Bull Arts Detroit. This is the fourth iteration of a show that has travelled to Omaha, St Louis, Houston and New York. I am there to attend an exhibition closing that functions – given how the show experiments with duration and the fact that Fazeli’s residency at the noncommercial space is ongoing – more like a midpoint in the project.  There is a concerted effort to return to the etymological roots of curating as care work The exhibition begins one floor underground, where visitors encounter Carolyn Lazard’s video CRIP TIME. (2018). Here, against an embroidered tablecloth, a pair of disembodied hands methodically sort medication into seven colourful dosage containers, each of which is subdivided into morning, noon, evening and bedtime. The process is accompanied by little ASMR-y clinks and pops, and robust closed captioning that annotates things like ‘(another breath is taken)’. It effectively introduces the major concerns of the exhibition: time marked by sickness and sickness marked by time; exploitation and accessibility; care and community.  Jen Liu’s extremely pink video Pink Slime Caesar Shift (2018) is screened in a womblike, beanbag-strewn side room. The work speculates a project in which bovine stem cells are altered, embedding syndicalist messages in DNA in order to secretly communicate with female factory workers in China. Animated sequences and wearables emphasise the links between labour and time even as the piece alludes to various forms of medical research and gene therapy. It’s occasionally heavy-handed, in the deployment of an instrumental version of The Internationale that spills out into the rest of the exhibition at regular intervals. This form of solidarity is faintly discomforting, presented on behalf of, as opposed to with, others.  Elsewhere, Park McArthur and Constantina Zavitsanos’s Score for Before (Scores for Two or More) (2013) pairs sculptural grab-bars with a wall text instructing the reader how to back a wheelchair up a ramp, while Jordan Lord’s poignant filmic treatise about undergoing open heart surgery emphasises the often-invisible collective labour of caretaking, using the scopic access of medical imaging technologies to speak to a broader lack of access for disabled populations (After… After…(Access), 2018). Captioning is especially descriptive here, functioning like alt text on Instagram. This is paralleled in the show’s online documentation: for example, the website text accompanying a still from Lord’s video reads, ‘At the bottom of the frame, an open caption appears over a black bar that reads: “the frame is filled by a blanket that moves up and down with my heartbeat”.’  The heart of the exhibition is its mimetic ‘Waiting Room’, replete with nondescript purple chairs, potted plants, a water cooler and magazine racks filled with radical publications emphasising the self-determination of care. The installation hosts a number of other commissions, including a food justice-themed Feed the People (c. 2013) colouring book by former Black Panther Wayne Curtis, who now runs a community garden. On the walls are posters advertising Cassie Thornton’s long-running project Give Me Cred! (2013–), which here takes the form of an alternative credit report workshop held at the local library in the weeks after the show closes. Sosa and Acosta’s Black Power Naps will also have an extended run as part of Fazeli’s programming series in the spring, which moves the show into offsite community spaces.  “With autoimmune diseases, the body doesn’t know where to begin and end,” Fazeli says in a filmed lecture that plays on a small monitor opposite Katya Tepper’s beguiling mixed-media sculptures-cum-wall-drawings, which illustrate this metaphor of the porous body. The exhibition’s boundaries were equally leaky. Its rigour and generosity suggest a show honed through years of conversation – Fazeli and several of the artists are members of Canaries, a collective of cis women, nonbinary and trans artists living with chronic illnesses and autoimmune conditions. But there is a sense that the artworks are incidental beyond their status as necessary byproducts of an institutional transaction and inseparable from their role as supports for a broader curatorial project.  There is a concerted effort to return to the etymological roots of curating as care work, not just as cute metaphor but to leverage personal and institutional prestige to effect material change. One of Fazeli’s major undertakings is into the fabric of the institution itself, working with local disability consultants Detroit Disability Power to permanently make the site more accessible (interventions range in scale from installing an external ramp to providing scent-free soap in the bathrooms). Most interesting is her strategy of hardcoding these improvements into the curatorial budget so as to ensure that they are an institutional priority. Accessibility is an “interesting lens” through which to see Detroit, Fazeli told the assembled press. So it was, for a city whose recent history has been characterised by extreme disparities in access, to both real estate and care.    Sick Time, Sleepy Time, Crip Time: Against Capitalism’s Temporal Bullying, Red Bull Arts Detroit, 18 September – 3 November 2019 From the March 2020 issue of ArtReview
ArtReview℗Chantal Peñalosa at Proyectos Monclova, Mexico City℗Gaby Cepeda℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Gaby Cepeda rethinks borders through the Mexican artist’s investigation into their recent past℗The term Border Art can be traced back to the US–Mexico frontier in 1984, when the Border Art Workshop/Taller de Arte Fronterizo (BAW/TAF) was founded in San Diego. Counting David Avalos, Guillermo Gómez-Peña and Sara-Jo Berman among its members, the group worked predominantly in conceptual and performance art addressing the political situation in the region. As the border came to be defined by the implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994, both BAW/TAF and InSite, the influential cross-border art event that ran from 1992 to 2005, interrogated what it means to protect freedom of trade while harshly restricting the movement of people.  These are the histories that have nourished the art of Chantal Peñalosa, born in 1987 in Tecate, Baja California. The title Unfinished Business Garage hints at her relationship to the work of her predecessors, whose legacy remains highly present locally, while part of it looks and feels like a memorial to an era past. Peñalosa has framed archival photographs of works created for InSite by artists including Helen Escobedo, Silvia Gruner, Alfredo Jaar and Marcos Ramírez ERRE and placed them in the locations on both sides of the border where the projects they document originally took place. In a gesture that both puts these ghosts to rest and appropriates their glories – like most memorials – she photographed the framed pictures on location and shows them here with updated titles inscribed on tiny gold plaques: Afterlife of By The Night Tide by Helen Escobedo, 1994 (2019); Afterlife of The Middle of the Road by Silvia Gruner, 1994 (2019); Afterlife of The Cloud by Alfredo Jaar, 2000 (2019), etc.  Another piece in this sparse show sets Peñalosa’s desire to understand the artists in whose footsteps she follows, the big names whose big gestures defined the Border Art movement, against their work’s resistance to simple meaning. Unfinished Business Garage I/V (2019–23) comprises a series of metal shelving units (of the kind you might find gathering dust in a garage) holding a disparate array of objects: ceramic snakes, a pre-Hispanic(ish)- looking clay mask, the silhouette of a cowboy hat carved in stone, tools, boxes, clothes. Peñalosa met with students at the art department of Tijuana’s Universidad Autónoma de Baja California to investigate the ‘forms’ that border artists used in their works in those genredefining years, and these are the resulting formal experiments (the forward-looking date might express the hope that this is an exercise to be continued). Whether the nondescript look of the objects is itself a calculated gesture is unclear: they seem inchoate, unsure of their place in a legacy. However successfully the collective exercise translates into the exhibition setting, it’s clear that Peñalosa is trying to disentangle what this very recent art history could mean to us today. It’s not an easy diagnosis to make: what can the forms and discourses that she holds in high regard pass on to her and her art community, at a time when borders and the logic that enforces them are more violent and determined than ever?   Chantal Peñalosa, Unfinished Business Garage, Proyectos Monclova, Mexico City, 7 November – 21 December 2019
ArtReview℗Eva Kot’átková at Kunsthal Charlottenborg, Copenhagen℗Rodney LaTourelle℗Reviews℗01/03/2020℗Rodney LaTourelle finds himself immersed in the installation artist’s transformative world℗Recalling early-twentieth-century avant-garde practice and influenced by the Surrealism of postwar Czech film and theatre, Eva Kot’átková’s work wraps abstract sculpture in psychological narratives to articulate social breakdown on behalf of the voiceless and disenfranchised. Here, visitors first encounter the eponymous Confessions of the Piping System (2019), a low, horizontal metal grid-structure festooned with fragments of images, sculptures and short texts on protest-sign placards. This is further activated at times by performers, who move on their backs within its restricted space while reciting stories, real and fictional, selected, commissioned or written by the artist. Among these are unsettling tales of the infirm and disadvantaged; tragic yet objective descriptions of precarious lives cut off from care and assistance. Penetrating the sculpture’s metal grid – which reads as both structure of orientation and repressive system – the placards display short quotations from the stories such as, ‘I speak for the sick who cannot afford to be sick’. The contrast between these fragile messages and the usual display of power and solidarity typically expressed by protest slogans is an empowering gesture. While the oppressive forces targeted are left unnamed, it’s easy to make a connection to the pressures of today’s gig economy, the ongoing social havoc of neoliberalism and the collapse of social structures Kot’átková experienced while growing up in post-Communist Czechoslovakia.  In the second room, an inset vitrine painted spectral red presents hundreds of images and fragments of text cut from books and newspapers – among them images of autonomous limbs, children at play, birds, reptiles, anatomical diagrams – each held in place by white string. Titled Error (2019), the collection materialises an alternative system of classification, questioning established taxonomies and defining the world – and the artist’s collage-based approach – as political. Also here is Place for Speaking Out, Place for Making the Private Public (2018), a vertical cage scaled to the dimensions of a single person. This work, originally situated in a public square, emphasises Kot’átková’s desire to give a public voice to people who need it by offering a protected, safe yet paradoxically restraining space to talk from and through.  Participation and the act of cutting-out come together in Room for Restoring Empathy (2019), comprising the remnants of a children’s workshop about ‘how to speak through objects or personal items’, in which difficult emotions were dealt with by snipping and sewing clothing. An oversize pair of scissors leaning against the wall stands in for how cutting, collage and editing might be positive ways to deal with negative psychologies. Borrowing from the clinical method of psychodrama, speaking ‘through’ an object is central to Kot’átková’s work, both providing an unspoken language for the voiceless and playfully instrumentalising the nonverbal communication of visual art and sculpture itself.  An oversize bed occupies the final room: visitors can crawl into it and listen to children’s dreams recounted via headphones. The scale ensures that anyone in the bed feels small, and the nature of the recounted dreams give a further sense of powerlessness and dysfunction. Rooted in daydreaming but also anxiety and politics, the brightly lit installation is titled Dream Machine is Asleep (2018). Kot’átková has described the imaginative power of dreams not as an escape but as an essential step in the transformation of reality. Her work is powerful not only because it allows victims of the systemic and often hidden brutality of our present moment to articulate their situations, but also because it offers hopeful tools of resistance, with a ‘light’ visual vocabulary that is playful, colourful and accessible – so that once the message of her mediating devices sinks in, your perception cannot but be transformed.  Eva Kot’átková, Confessions of the Piping System, Kunsthal Charlottenborg, Copenhagen, 21 September 2019 – 16 February 2020
ArtReview℗a.O. – b.c.: An Audiovisual Diary at Athens School of Fine Arts and State of Concept℗Max L. Feldman℗Reviews℗07/02/2020℗What does it mean to be Greek? Max L. Feldman reviews a group show tackling the national imaginary℗Neurotics, Freud thought, are ‘anchored somewhere in their past’. Fixated on the memory of some earlier happy time from which they cannot free themselves, they find the present and future unbearable. Most modern nation-states take a similarly fixated view of themselves, agonising over how to make good on a supposedly glorious past. The group exhibition a.O. – b.c.: An Audiovisual Diary deals with one version of this, questioning not just who the Greeks are or were, but the contemporary Greek national imaginary.   It doesn’t, of course, tell the whole story of modern Greece: independence from the Ottomans, Nazi occupation, dictatorship, the democratic present. This is hardly a narrative of triumph – nobody except the far right would want that, even if it were possible. Instead, by limiting the historical scope, but showing a vast range of works – some 60 pieces from 80 listed contributors, including paintings, videos, installations, graphics, conceptual works, photographs and more, spread between State of Concept’s space in the Filopappou district and the School of Fine Arts 3km away – curators Vicky Zioga, Electra Karatza, Maria Adela Konomi, Lydia Markaki and iLiana Fokianaki show work produced after the 2004 Olympic Games but before the 2010 sovereign debt crisis, as the initials in the title hint.  The opaque title and sheer volume of eclectic work makes a.O. – b.c. less a diary than a neurotic symptom, condensing and displacing the many effects of a collective trauma: the sudden shift from petty nationalistic pride during the Olympics to the bailouts, humanitarian crisis, riots, police brutality and the rise of the far right. Austerity might officially be over, but the wounds to the Greek psyche persist, so viewing a.O. – b.c. is like seeing all those unresolved feelings up close, unfiltered, in something like the transference process. We can clarify some of this by making five works stand in for the whole exhibition. While this isn’t ideal, they reflect its main theme: how the Olympics and the crisis intensified already existing neuroses about Greek identity. The real question, of course, is which ‘past’ it is anchored in and how and why this is so.  This is very clear in Bill Balaskas’s short video Parthenon Rising (II) (2010), downstairs in the Filopappou space. One dramatic image, the imposing, postcard-perfect Parthenon at night, is struck by flashes of light in time to thundering piano music. The radiance could be coming from fireworks from the Olympics’ opening ceremony – or Molotov cocktails thrown at the police. We aren’t told, seeing only the chiaroscuro effect. Either way, the Parthenon is a convenient ideological stand-in for the heroic birth of a whole civilisation (if not civilisation itself), now a burden weighing down attempts to create something new, with four centuries of Ottoman influence airbrushed out. In Balaskas’s film, the ancient monument can reflect only indirectly how things are now, since we never see what is really happening for what it is.  Leda Papaconstantinou’s film The City and the Sunset (2007) shows the baking Athenian sun sink behind the mountains. The Ancient Greeks had a cyclical concept of time modelled on observable nature (day and night and seasonal changes), represented by the pantheon of gods. The mechanical gaze of the camera, however, imposes a modern notion of what Hannah Arendt called ‘rectilinear’ time, moving in one relentless direction. Papaconstantinou still manages to evoke the wonder and terror of the sunset as it slowly fades from view, despite the fact that images of this kind have, in less sensitive hands, been reduced to marketable kitsch for stock photos or computer screensavers.  A certain kind of terror is evident in December Riots (2008) by photojournalist Eirini Vourloumis, showing masked protesters and heavily armoured riot police swathed in acrid teargas. The riots were set off when police murdered fifteen-year-old student Alexandros Grigoropoulos, but expressed other grievances relating to the global financial crisis. Vourloumis’s images capture the rage of people who feel they will always be oppressed, never determining their own lives, just as a preceding generation of Greeks lived under the thumb of a US-backed military junta. Vangelis Vlahos picks up on this history with a different take on the gap between the national imaginary and real life. His framed photocopy of a 2004 US ambassador’s report on Greece’s national defence capacities reminds us that Greece still has budget-swallowing strategic commitments as a NATO member, despite the fact that, at the height of the crisis, middle-class people struggled to feed their children, and that refugees still sleep on the streets of Athens.  Artist duo Barking Dogs United’s Property Offer (2009), three images from Edem Beach along the luxurious coastline at Palaio Faliro in the south of Athens, brings institutional critique to bear on the crisis. The collective take what look like, under normal circumstances, bland tourist snaps of tanning bodies in the sun. More deviously, however, they place the beach’s orange umbrellas across the sand to spell out, in English, ‘FOR SALE’. This can only be seen from above, as an image pulled from Google maps illustrates, but, with black humour, draws attention to growing economic inequality and the degradation of the public sphere. The lost polis is yet another Athenian invention: easily fetishised, impossible to live up to, its very absence reminds us that there is no truly happy past for this or any other nation.      a.O. – b.c.: An Audiovisual Diary at Athens School of Fine Arts and State of Concept, Athens, through 1 February
ArtReview℗Derek Jarman at IMMA, Dublin℗Ben Eastham℗Reviews℗06/02/2020℗Ben Eastham on the multifaceted career of a great British artist℗The visitor to this revelatory survey is greeted by the checked gaze of the sixteen-year-old Derek Jarman, almond-eyed and curly haired, in a 1959 half-length self-portrait in oil. The young artist looks over his left shoulder, chest angled towards the threshold leading into the next room in the exhibition. Through it streams a blue light that picks out the cobalt panels in the painting’s Cezanne-ish patchwork background, accompanied by a voice reciting the litany of treatments associated with late-stage AIDS. Pairing the juvenile painting with Jarman’s elegiac monochrome film Blue (1993) establishes the points between which this retrospective oscillates: figuration and abstraction, stillness and movement, materialism and mysticism, the body and the soul. The scratches that fleck the film’s otherwise immaculate frames of International Klein Blue, meanwhile, introduce a body of work that seeks transcendence in the flawed physical world. These career bookends also establish a narrative arc – from the performance of artistic identity to naked self-expression – that an otherwise chronological presentation sometimes supports and other times complicates. Charting his education at London’s Slade School of Art in the mid-1960s, a room of early experiments in modernist painting – from Fauvism to Vorticism, Art Informel to Pittura Metafisica – suggests an artist trying on styles to fit, although the canvases are elevated above pastiche by the student’s facility and the emergence of motifs that will recur throughout his career. These magpie early canvases do not disguise the influence of artists as varied as Wyndham Lewis and William Crozier, while also suggesting an artist seeking to distinguish himself. Indeed, Jarman never abandons the impulse to ventriloquise – as late as 1991, he is inspired by a Frank Auerbach exhibition to knock out some spiky impasto landscapes – or the fondness for sgraffiti and pentimenti that suggest hidden and partially revealed meanings. A series of paintings from the late 1960s mark Jarman’s achievement of a style appropriate to both his own preoccupations and the times through which he was living. That the cartographical lines and printed matter of Landscape with a Blue Pool (1967) recall the architectural collages of Milan’s then-recently founded Superstudio feels more like synchronicity than cross-pollination: different artists catching the same wind. Indeed, so compelling are previously unexhibited works including Landscape with Crow (1967) – loaded with symbols and spells – that it’s hard to suppress a pang of regret that his imminent discovery of filmmaking, and his own restless curiosity, diverted Jarman from devoting more time to the possibilities opened up by these paintings.  The story told by the rest of the exhibition is more familiar, although the opening, with its focus on rarely seen paintings, illuminates the grammar underpinning Jarman’s work in the languages of theatre, literature, pop music, horticulture, film and activism (a legacy extended by his many mentees, from actor Tilda Swinton to filmmaker Isaac Julien and costumier Sandy Powell, whose creations for Jarman’s 1993 film Wittgenstein are displayed here). While the curating resists the temptation to refer everything back to Jarman’s celebrated feature films (a screening programme makes them available without attempting to shoehorn them into the exhibition’s narrative), it does help to situate them within his broader artistic development. A looping compilation of Super 8 shorts, for instance, reveals the increasing sophistication of his editing techniques as well as his evolution from Warholian flatness into a more expansive literary romanticism.  The impression that Jarman’s multifaceted practice is best understood collectively is reinforced by the intelligent, cross-referencing arrangement of sketches, photographs and films. The recurrence of esoteric and alchemical symbols including sphere, stone and pyramid in drawings, paintings, films and costumes illustrate how a single artistic project can be refracted through different media. The sheer volume of his production means that these forays into set design, poetry and music videos are inevitably teasing rather than satisfying, prompting the hope that offshoot exhibitions might pick up the thread.  The ‘protest’ of the exhibition’s title, most literally represented by film and photographic documentation of Jarman’s crusading work as an AIDS activist, is a principle underpinning his work rather than an end to which it is put or extracurricular activity. The provocatively priapic paintings exhibited at the height of Mary Whitehouse’s moral crusade during the early 1980s, for example, are a stark reminder that no work here is untouched by the experience of a politically active gay man living through Thatcherism and the crisis. But the more explicitly activist works should not be separated from gentler surprises, including an orgiastic and never before exhibited 1979 painting (Pleasures of Italy), which half-conceals a swirl of poetic fragments under a dirty white screen of paint. The work protests the suppression by a materialist and prescriptive society of the mystery and esotericism that are fundamental to Jarman’s version of beauty. Yet even the foreknowledge of how this must end will not inoculate visitors from the devastating effects of the final rooms. First come a series of monumental canvases composed with the help of studio assistants (the ailing artist reduced to pulling his bare fingers through the acrylic to inscribe desperate five-furrowed tracks and circular swirls in their surfaces). Finally, a series of wall-hanging assemblages created in the seaside cottage to which the dying artist retreated, first exhibited in 1992, foreground the impedimenta of illness: pill boxes, vials, syringes and pumps. They attest to 35 years making art out of a radical life and agonised death. Derek Jarman PROTEST! at IMMA, Dublin, 15 November – 23 February
ArtReview℗Biennale de Rabat℗Louise Darblay℗Reviews℗06/02/2020℗Louise Darblay questions the sincerity of a women-centred show℗‘Une biennale? A Rabat? Pour qui?’ my friend texts back after I tell him I’m coming to visit him in Morocco (and stay on his sofa). The more people I meet in Rabat, the clearer it becomes that no one has a clue there is a biennale opening across 11 venues in the self-dubbed ‘city of light’ – the website wasn’t up, there were no social media pages and, beside a few billboards, there was little communication with the public.   ‘For whom’ strikes me as a fair question when it comes to a largely state-funded event on this scale. (Morocco’s only comparable exhibition, the Marrakech Biennale, has been indefinitely postponed; sponsors pulled out when it emerged that the last edition, in 2016, operated with a deficit of €250,000.) At the press conference, curator Abdelkader Damani’s answer to that question seems to be: for artists, for the public, but especially for women, as the biennale’s 64-strong, women-only artist list is meant to show. Art history is too often written by men, he stated, and so, by offering women the stage, his biennale would be an act of ‘reparation’.   The intent is laudable… but the tokenistic and marginalising effect of Damani’s gesture felt not only self-congratulatory but deeply problematic The intent is laudable: this is, after all, a country where women’s rights are often dictated by religion and where, a few days into my stay, an open letter signed by over 400 Moroccan women condemned the imprisonment of journalist Hajar Raissouni, sentenced to a year in jail for premarital sex and having an abortion, and called for the revision of archaic and oppressive laws. Yet the tokenistic and marginalising effect of Damani’s gesture, not to mention its implications (making women reliant on men to give them a voice), felt not only self-congratulatory but deeply problematic.   What rang true, nonetheless, were the acts of writing and rewriting performed by many works in the exhibition. Covering two flanks of the facade of the Musée Mohammed VI, the main venue of the biennale, Katharina Cibulka’s monumental banner reads, ‘As long as following our rules is more important than following our hearts, I will be a feminist’; an oddly utopian yet too-ambiguous statement, whose literal Arabic translation by the artist, running along the other side of the building, sparked debate among the public (the museum’s director, Abdelaziz El Idrissi, says the institution was aware of the dubious translation but preferred not to interfere with the artist’s work). Inside the museum, the thread is picked up by Ghada Amer’s Private Rooms (1998), a series of satin garment bags hanging from a cloth rack, their silky surface embroidered with passages from the Qur’an that mention women, but translated into French. Here, the translation is both statement and encryption, a means of negotiating restrictions on representing the holy Arabic text.   At the Oudayas Museum, a seventeenth-century Andalusian-inspired palace and its gardens housed in the Kasbah, a multimedia installation by Katia Kameli fittingly explores converging influences and how narratives move through cultures. Part of her ongoing research project Stream of Stories (2014–), it traces the genealogy of La Fontaine’s Fables (1668) back to the Hindu Panchatantra, a collection of allegorical tales written in Sanskrit around 350 CE. While the original manuscript is lost, it survives through a stream of translations (into Persian around 570 CE, then from Persian into Arabic in 760). Kameli’s display, which ranges from reproductions of original texts and animal masks to blown-up excerpts of the fable’s script and a video projected onto a screen, focuses on the Arabic version, the popular Kalila wa-Dimna, which reached Europe in the thirteenth century as The Fables of Bidpai. The installation reveals how the stories (and their moral messages) were edited through translation to suit different cultures or political aims (up to La Fontaine’s address to the dauphin), while pointing to the fluidity of certain foundational narratives across cultures and national borders.   Questions around our relationship to cultural heritage also run through the most compelling solo presentations. At Fort Rottembourg (built in 1902 to host two large cannons gifted by German arms manufacturer Krupp), such questions rise up through the cracks of Dana Awartani’s tiled floor (Standing by the ruins, 2019). Replicating traditional Islamic geometric patterns, Awartani used the Moroccan tiling technique of zellij but skipped the tempering and firing that would have ensured the floor’s conservation. The work’s slow deterioration – and eventual crumbling  – throughout the duration of the biennale feels like a muffled echo of the violent destruction of Palmyra and other heritage sites by ISIS. Taking a perhaps more preventative approach, Rand Abdul Jabbar’s exhibition at Galerie Banque Populaire (one of several banks in the city with exhibition spaces) reads like her own sculptural  ‘musée imaginaire’, composed of ceramic interpretations, we’re told, of cultural artefacts from the Mesopotamian region encountered by the artist in various ethnographic museums (Earthly Wonders, Celestial Beings, 2019). Scrutinising the objects arranged in mysterious groupings on plinths, the museumgoer conditioned to look for wall texts offering clues as to their provenance and historical significance does so in vain; instead, by their quiet presence, the objects – some evoking tools, others human or abstract representations, all rendered in seductive glazes – ask us to imagine their stories, or consider them on their own aesthetic terms.   These presentations dedicated to a single artist’s practice give depth and value to a biennale otherwise lacking in focus. The title Un instant avant le monde, no matter its poetic and philosophical underpinnings (the press release quotes Hannah Arendt’s writings on the ‘infinite improbability’ of new beginnings), is so wide it could speak to any artwork ever produced, and as a result the selection here feels driven by a curator’s whim. As to corrective gestures of gender imbalance in the artworld, the real change will come when exhibiting women artists does not warrant congratulation.   Un instant avant le monde, Biennale de Rabat, 24 September – 18 December
ArtReview℗Chips and Egg at The Sunday Painter, London℗Gwen Burlington℗Reviews℗04/02/2020℗‘Poignant, funny and unapologetically personal’ – Gwen Burlington reviews an all-women group show subverting gender stereotypes℗Chips and Egg presents five female artists whose work explores the practical conditions of their gender in ways that are thoughtful, poignant and at times humorous. Curated by Helen Nisbet, it takes its title from the scene in the 1989 film Shirley Valentine (‘I like chips and egg on Tuesday, this is Thursday’) in which our hero reclaims her agency, leaving her routine-loving husband and home for Greece. Valentine’s self-discovery is an attempt to escape the clutches of domesticity; these artists seek to move beyond clichés of femininity by reclaiming and reinventing the experience of womanhood. In six mid-sized paintings across the walls that greet the visitor at The Sunday Painter, Milly Thompson foregrounds post-menopausal women’s sexuality through her hedonistic paintings of sultry women lazily reclining. Rafaela in her Lair (2018) is particularly sensuous, with bold brushstrokes and deep, dreamy colours. The muffled sounds of a woman talking extends from behind the black cloth leading to a projection of Alia Syed’s documentary film Unfolding (1987), set in a council launderette in Deptford. In contrast to Thompson’s women at leisure, Syed overlays and repeats images of women folding clothes, as if the film is methodically folding in on itself. It captures the ritual of their daily work and the support of a community space. Despite their different approaches, Thompson and Syed’s pieces work harmoniously as seductive commentaries on selfhood and collective care.   In the downstairs gallery, Kate Davis’s Charity (2017), a thoughtful and humorous video-essay on the subject of breastfeeding told through stills of canonical statues and paintings, is shown on a wall monitor with headphones. In voiceover, Davis imagines formally contracting the labour of breast- feeding and to form a union in order to demand better rights, as images of Madonna suckling Jesus and Roman Charity slide on screen. The combination is genuinely funny.  In a similar vein, Cinzia Mutigli’s video My Boring Dreams featuring Whitney, Nenah, Kylie and the Gang (2019) collages clips of celebrities, workout videos, cleaning and beauty products while Mutigli reflects on celebrity, success and interpretations of her dreams. Both essays are playful and profound reflections on the harsh realities of women’s bodily experiences; their reproductive function, their role as carers and the expectations put upon them.   The exhibition’s strength lies in its cohesion, as the works gesture to each other and motifs emerge: tiles, dreams, washing machines. As an exploration of the female condition, it resists the temptation to make overarching claims or to ostentatiously subvert stereotypes in favour of a more sensitive, documentary approach. Poignant, funny and unapologetically personal, Chips and Egg responds to the domestic as a site of constraint, as well as a source of rich imagery. The result is an idiosyncratic perspective on these women’s lived experience: an exhibition about women, not only for them. Chips and Egg, The Sunday Painter, London, 15 November – 21 December 2019
ArtReview℗Elizabeth Price at The Whitworth, Manchester℗Rachel Hughes℗Reviews℗04/02/2020℗The artist’s new films are exhilarating attempts to dismantle and rebuild British collective memory, writes Rachel Hughes – through 1 March℗The videos, sculptures and archives in Elizabeth Price’s most extensive UK survey exhibition to date draw on sources as disparate as coalmines, neckties and the Shangri-Las to present history as an ever-changing social practice rather than a static repository of information.  The British artist’s video installations play at intervals in two blacked-out rooms on opposite sides of the Whitworth’s central gallery. K (2015) works across two screens, one of which shows a flickering animation composed of thousands of still images of the sun rephotographed in the ‘K’ light that gives them their uncanny glow; the other shows a digitally animated hosiery production line. Clips of pop stars migrate between the two, while a group of professional mourners, the Krystals, provide an onscreen narrative as the mechanical loom suggests their performance of sorrow. The viewer is left to join the dots, or to consider how meaning is generated through these relationships. AT THE HOUSE OF MR X (2007), meanwhile, takes the viewer on a tour through the home of a cosmetics mogul-cum-art collector. The camera lingers on sumptuous interiors as the onscreen script (and, briefly, a voiceover) moves between registers: archival, curatorial, commercial. The effect is to unsettle the authority of any single interpretation.  The exhibition’s standout is THE WOOLWORTHS CHOIR OF 1979 (2012), a video installation bringing together archival and new material to reflect on how memories are formed in a fragmented media landscape. Commemorating the Manchester department store fire that left ten dead, and shown in the city for the first time, it is placed opposite AT THE HOUSE OF MR X – the cheap flammable armchairs pictured in the former contrasting jarringly with the latter’s sleek Bauhaus furnishings. Combining moving image, music and text, this vast projection is a hypnotic sensory assault. A slideshow lecture on choir architecture segues into a swelling girl-group chorus (“WE KNOW”), which bleeds into footage of the blaze; clips from music videos are spliced with horrified onlookers’ recollections of the incident, their gestures together forming a syncopated rhythm. The Shangri-Las’ ‘twist of the wrist’, for instance, finds its eerie counterpart in the waving arms of those trapped behind barred windows. By collaging such incongruent images and materials, Price creates an unnervingly visceral act of remembrance.  Similarly defamiliarising strategies are evident in SLOW DANS (2019), a largescale, ten-channel installation that combines KOHL (2018), FELT TIP (2018) and new work THE TEACHERS (2019) into an interrelating trilogy. In this new arrangement, the past, present and future entwine: coalmines are reimagined as underground communication networks; patterned neckties and purple markers reframed as symbols of workplace misogyny and feminist revolt; a dystopia conceived in which speech has been abandoned. Sound spills into the otherwise quiet central gallery, which houses two new works: GETT READY (2019), a collection of black-and-white pinhole photographs of bulbous tongues and bric-a-brac glassware, and INKY SPIT, FLOPPY DISQ, VOX GERL (2019), sculptural, calligraphic prints. Here the archive becomes self-referential, accommodating phrases and motifs from SLOW DANS, including the coalmine photographs of Albert Walker that informed KOHL and traced the industry’s demise under Thatcher. In an era of social amnesia and disputed histories, Price’s attention to dismantling and rebuilding the collective memory is dissident, exhilarating and necessary.  Elizabeth Price, A LONG MEMORY, The Whitworth, Manchester, 25 October through 1 March
ArtReview℗Then℗Neha Kale℗Reviews℗20/01/2020℗Neha Kale looks to White Rabbit Gallery’s group exhibition to examine contemporary capitalism in China℗Here are rows of schoolchildren, dressed identically in yellow polo shirts and red Young Pioneer neckerchiefs. They raise their arms above their heads and over their chests, moving in unison as if their bodies are attached to invisible strings. A girl in a ponytail flashes a toothy smile at the camera. She hitches up her shorts, a small movement, but big enough to create a glitch in the collective formation. She falls out of sync with her classmates, and in a second the spell is broken. The Times Are Summoning, a 2007 videowork by Chinese artist Meiya Lin, occupies a darkened chamber on the first floor of Sydney’s White Rabbit Gallery. The work, which is based on the compulsory calisthenics lessons the artist endured as a schoolgirl growing up in Xiamen, unfolds to a dark-yet-jaunty soundtrack: cheery percussion punctuated by barked instructions. It’s hard to come up with a better sonic metaphor for the gallery’s much-anticipated tenth-anniversary exhibition, Then. The show brings together over 60 artworks from the collection of Judith Neilson, the Zimbabwe-born founder of White Rabbit Gallery and a philanthropist who first started visiting artists’ studios in China during the 1990s, alongside Wang Zhiyuan, the Chinese artist who introduced her to the country’s explosive art scene. Then focuses on defining works from the gallery’s exhibitions programme, showcasing the depth and complexity of a country that’s all too easily flattened and exoticised in the Australian imagination, a mission that White Rabbit, one of Australia’s rare privately funded museums, has undertaken since its inception. Then is also a cultural document of the ways in which China’s dizzying trajectory of globalisation and urbanisation is reshaping and rupturing the country’s social fabric. This surreal new reality is best seen through the artists who – via audacity, artistry and sheer inventiveness – are responding to these shifts in radical and playful ways. Over the last 35 years, nearly 500 million people have moved to Chinese megacities from rural areas. These migrants often eke out precarious livings as labourers or vendors on the fringes of cities that glitter with wealth, like Shanghai and Beijing. A narrow corridor that leads to The Times Are Summoning plays host to Chinese O spring (2005), Zhang Dali’s elegy for the undocumented workers who have enabled China’s newfound prosperity. Twenty lifesize bodies made of resin, their backs branded with their village of origin, hang upside down from the ceiling. Their ankles are bound like animals awaiting slaughter, their identities as interchangeable as the Uber Eats workers who criss-cross the suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne. These are the bodies of the gig economy, where, trapped in a new kind of wage slavery, people are reduced to meat. Of course, women have always understood objectification. But throughout art history, Chinese women – like many women across South Asia, Africa and the Pacific – have been fetishised and infantilised, forever deemed objects of consumption by the West. On the second floor of the gallery, photographer Han Lei’s Pan Jinlian Who Performs as a Rabbit Girl (2008) recasts Édouard Manet’s Olympia (1863) as a middle-aged Chinese woman in fishnet socks and bunny ears. She looks squarely at the viewer, chin up, the subject of her own fantasies. If that image subverts the erotics of looking and longing, Wang Zhiyuan’s Object of Desire (2008) casts romantic want as a consumerist impulse. His enormous fibreglass sculpture of neon-pink underpants hum to the voice of Zhou Xuan, an iconic singer who lived in 1930s Shanghai. As China’s economic imperatives become increasingly bound up in Australia’s future, the work – strange yet strikingly familiar – feels less like an exotic artefact than a recovered memory. Its blinking neon lights evoke a sense of shared cultural nostalgia that also winks at the countries’ intertwined destinies. But here, Xuan’s plaintive love songs are rendered as cheap and disposable as garish lingerie, the relics of a world that commodifies all that is human in us. Then at White Rabbit Gallery, Sydney, through 26 January 
ArtReview℗Lucy McKenzie at Cabinet, London℗Matthew Turner℗Reviews℗13/01/2020℗Aspects of life normally annexed from shopping – one’s...℗Aspects of life normally annexed from shopping – one’s private thoughts and health data, for example – are rapidly being subsumed into the marketplace. Not to mention that the experience of some commercial art galleries is increasingly difficult to distinguish from that of the department store. For her exhibition at Cabinet, Lucy McKenzie adopts anachronistic styles – propaganda murals and trompe l’oeil paintings – to foreground the similarities between consumerism and totalitarianism. The show takes the form of an uncanny, sparsely stocked showroom, with realist paintings of erotic photobooks and bespoke vases and chairs replacing mass-produced commodities. Here, however, the array of consumables are mostly flattened, as trompe l’oeil images in the painted tabletop surfaces that display them, suggesting, perhaps, how standardised goods are more a superficial manifestation of an immaterial desire than meaningful physical possessions. The glazed surface of Quodlibet LXVII (Dressmaking) (2017–19) – a modernist dining table bookended by two similarly styled chairs – displays images of dressmaking patterns and tools for women’s clothing. The implication is that fashion, particularly for women (the show includes the female form from multiple angles), constructs and enforces a flattened ideal onto three-dimensional people: bodies regimented to suit a capitalist production line. McKenzie takes outmoded, decorative and commercial artforms and pits them against the contemporary fetish for novelty and uniqueness. At the centre of the gallery stand two reconstructions of Soviet-era window displays (Arcade 1 and Arcade 2, both 2019). Their usual function, as the first point of visual contact with the shopper, is to promote an orthodoxy of aesthetic aspirations amidst crowds passing by on the street, and to make generic commodities appear unique. But here, on closer inspection, all their marble surfaces – based on those found in the fascist-classical architecture of Benito Mussolini’s EUR district of Rome – have been handpainted, and the plastic mannequin, which bears a passing resemblance to the artist, is a one-off. The fantasy of originality and uniqueness in shopfronts here becomes a reality. Continuing the theme of bodily discipline, within the opposite wall, and seen only through apertures cut into it, is a reproduction in oil paint of the mural on display in the central reading room of the Russian State Library in Moscow (Giving Up The Shadows On My Face, 2019). In the same way that mass-produced items attempt to homogenise desire for products and clothes, the original mural, in showing the idealised body and its relationship to others, is evidence of Soviet Russia’s predilection for eradicating the individual in favour of the collective. In McKenzie’s version of the mural, however, she has depicted the repressed sexuality of characters who caress each other and explore the flesh under their clothes, and by extension their private lives away from the Soviet regime (and perhaps even consumerism’s impersonal ideals). Although the characters appear to have been in some sense liberated, the frame through which they are viewed is a mechanism of control, cutting and ordering the scene. The body is objectified, sold and exploited through the frame that can be seen in the shopfront and most explicitly in the pornographic books painted into Quodlibet LXVI (2019). In contemporary capitalist society, individuals are both consumers and consumed, the difference effaced through the sale and micro-management of private information. Even if we are identikit in this respect, at least we are yet to give up, counter to the show’s title, the shadows on our faces.
ArtReview℗Art Encounters Biennial 2019, Timișoara℗Rebecca ODwyer℗Reviews℗13/01/2020℗Rebecca O’Dwyer considers the rapid changes and creeping gentrification in the Romanian city℗Staged in the small but significant Romanian city of Timișoara, historic capital of the long-contested Banat region, the third edition of Art Encounters is framed as a yearlong project rather than a traditional biennial. Emphasising local engagement at the expense of international press, a range of workshops, lectures and screenings were held in the weeks and months before the exhibition even opened. Further thwarting any reduction to neat, easily communicable messages, it is not a thematic exhibition; instead, curators Maria Lind and Anca Rujoiu reference the work of locally born author Herta Müller, comparing the biennial to a confluence of distinct but still inseparable ‘winds’. Its largest iteration to date, the biennial features the work of 80 international artists, including around 20 – among them Agnieszka Polska, Ahmet Ögüt, Michael Beutler and Céline Condorelli – commissioned to make new work. Unfurling across the city, artworks are installed in railway alleyways and university concourses, on streets, billboards and shopfronts, along with other venues – such as the Corneliu Miklosi Public Transport Museum, the Banat National Museum and the Communist Consumer Museum – more accustomed to the display of objects, if not exactly of contemporary art. This demonstrates the curators’ explicit desire to use preexisting sites as a way of resisting the city’s gentrification. Still, it remains hard not to think that, like most biennials, it represents part of a strategy to do exactly this. Nonetheless, this curatorial approach gives the exhibition an oddly atmospheric quality, as though the city has been very subtly infiltrated. Its image printed on marketing materials, as an artwork and in shopfronts, Polska’s Wayward Pigeon (2019) – representing an ideal if nonexistent carrier pigeon – seems to recur constantly, like an omnipresent whack-a-mole. In the upper level of the Banat National Museum (housed in the Maria Therezia Bastion, the reconditioned medieval battlements used to ward off repeated Ottoman attacks), Condorelli’s installation Collection Show (2019) is similarly covert, rooted in the selection of preexisting things. Brightly coloured octagonal display stands collecting items sourced from locally held collections of art, communist paraphernalia and regional textiles, the installation is considered and affecting, while simultaneously implying the placeless and infinitely transferable character of much biennial art. A considerable amount of strong, mainly filmic work is housed outside the old city centre at the Youth House, the striking postwar behemoth that was once the headquarters of the Timiș Communist Youth Union and is now home to, among other things, a coworking space. Fictional but filmed in a documentary style, Ane Hjort Guttu’s Time Passes (2015) presents an uncanny depiction of youth’s unwieldy idealism and indignation, demonstrating the problem of empathy as a rationale for making art. Down in the building’s labyrinthine basement, Every Good Body Dances (2019), a new commission by the young Singaporean artist Kray Chen, consists of a single take showing local folk musicians performing the same song in a range of tempos, from frenetic to funereal: a poignant, abridged take on one of many disappearing worlds. Observing a man carefully transporting Dagestani heritage over an elevated tightrope two paintings at a time, Taus Makhacheva’s cinematic Tightrope, Dagestan (2015) shows something of the tenacity required to prevent losing them entirely. Polska’s mercurial pigeon appears once again, this time digitally printed on a semi-translucent sheath floating above the central concourse of the Public Transport Museum. Surrounding this cavernous central space – also inhabited by strong sculptural works by Beutler and Bella Rune – are a number of adjacent rooms again mostly showing films. Examining the genesis and eventual failure of the Non-Aligned Movement, Naeem Mohaiemen’s film-length Two Meetings and a Funeral (2017) undermines the naturalisation process underscoring the contemporary status quo. Originally commissioned for Documenta 14 (2017), the film feels resonant in Timișoara: in December 1989, the city was the first part of Romania to declare itself free of Nicolae Ceaușescu’s particularly brutal variant of socialism. At that moment, the apparent inevitability of authoritarianism revealed its contingency. Romania could be something else entirely, or it could be the same as everywhere else. This decision appears ongoing. Timișoara is clearly changing, with Art Encounters and its 2021 European City of Culture status in particular serving to accelerate this process. In the wake of the country’s 2007 entry into the EU, multinationals are favouring the city as a production and processing centre, while also touting it as a tech hub, thanks in no small part to comparatively cheap labour and a remarkably strong broadband connection. This emergent connectivity also implies the country’s role in affairs it previously could neither see nor name – things that simply arrive, seemingly on the wind. In a tunnel at the city’s northern train station, the Romanian artist Dan Acostioaiei’s mosaic Seas under Deserts (2019) reworks a postcard sent by the artist’s father from Syria during the 1970s, when posted in the country as a cartographer. Showing two smiling women in casually traditional attire, the mural communicates a sense of peaceful antiquity. ‘Souvenir de Syrie’, reads the bold red inscription across its top. Installed in a site emblematic of the city’s strengthening link to the wider world, however, the mural also highlights the inconvenient underside of connectivity. Precisely when freedoms of movement are increasing in Romania, they are reducing elsewhere. Bodies, like winds, hit impasses, or are only permitted to move in one way.
ArtReview℗10th Göteborg International Biennial for Contemporary Art℗Hans Carlsson℗Reviews℗13/01/2020℗Hans Carlsson on entanglement and interconnected relationships℗Part of the Labyrinth is itself multipart; the same theme will stretch over a second edition of the biennial in 2021. That one biennial is in this case actually two, separated yet the same, is, according to curator Lisa Rosendahl’s exhibition statement, aligned with the idea of ‘entanglement’ as a way of thinking about the world in terms of mutual and interconnected relationships, rather than as a range of rationally separated entities. This idea also links to Gothenburg’s own history: the holistic worldview was, according to Rosendahl, defeated in Europe by the work of seventeenth-century philosophers such as René Descartes in the same period that Gothenburg was established. Part of the Labyrinth relates this philosophical scope to some very local narratives. Knud Stampe’s stunning largescale ink-drawing triptych Väggteckning (1970–71), which has long hung in the union clubhouse of the Swedish Ball Bearing Factory, is now on display at Göteborgs Konsthall. Its multitude of 5mm-ink-pen lines advertise its lengthy gestation, monotonous labour comparable to Stampe’s depressed-looking factory workers, depicted here surreally out of context against the drawing’s white background. Väggteckning is presented in a small, tightly installed room that creates both intimacy and distance between viewers and the art, the works’ display suggesting a museological installation. This doubleness reminds us that art, and the white cube, can alienate as well as evoke ‘entanglement’. Next to Stampe’s work, Rikke Luther’s Concrete Nature (2018–19) is a documentary-style video revolving around concrete, a material made since antiquity but manufactured on an industrial scale from the nineteenth century, later enabling the buildings of the European and American welfare states. This political project, Luther suggests, charged concrete with ideological agency, since it enabled modern largescale premises for housing political and social institutions (municipal centres, healthcare institutions, housing projects) intended to distribute wealth and guarantee social security. Another work by the artist at the Natural History Museum, The Planetary Sand Bank (2019), is a triptych of screenprinted canvases mimicking the pedagogical aesthetic of its host venue, explaining the legal and political forces in play when extracting sand, and the process’s environmental effects. Luther’s two works deal with potentiality and progressiveness, and, simultaneously, the devastating consequences of the same modernity.  At Röda Sten Konsthall, contrariwise, there’s a more utopian tone. For example: Åsa Elzén’s Transcripts of a Fallow (2019), a ‘transcript’ of the large carpet Fallow, created by Maja and Amelie Fjaestad in 1919–20 for the Fogelstad Group. The latter promoted progressive ideas of feminism, design, farming and ecology, the concept of ‘lying fallow’ standing for sustainability: to let rest, reuse and coexist with nature rather than live from it. Elzén’s piece connects historiography with the practical knowledge of handicraft and agricultural traditions. A similar interest in earthly time underwrites Susanne Kriemann’s Canopy, canopy (2018), an installation made from fabric coloured by plants and soil gathered near an abandoned German uranium mine. There, the plants catalyse and clean the poisoned earth. Here, their radioactivity makes the fabric change colour during the exhibition, like a developing photo. The link to photography as industrialised technology based on resource extraction – articulated in Kriemann’s previous works – is, however, lost here. What remains functions more as a metaphor for photography. Sometimes, then, the works in the biennial fall into the trap of simplification, not doing justice to art’s entangling capabilities. More often, though, they both uncover a contradictory modernity – one that prompts us to dream of a better world while simultaneously destroying the planet’s fabric – and give historical examples of alternative models for rethinking man in an ecological and social context, suggesting how to act in order not to forget that we are always, already, part of the labyrinth.
ArtReview℗Christina Quarles at Hepworth Wakefield℗Skye Sherwin℗Reviews℗13/01/2020℗In the Los Angeles-based painter’s work, Skye Sherwin finds a battle between the body’s physicality and internally imposed norms℗The figures that Christina Quarles begins by drawing straight to canvas are a fragmented, refracted, everchanging jumble. These outlines are fleshed out into painted limbs that stretch and twist with a soft spaghetti ease: boobs dangle or jut at right angles while butt cheeks bloom into radiant red suns. Skin dissolves into ribs, muscle and guts. Faces are rarely more than spectral smudges, but there’s a particular emphasis on heavily outlined, cartoonish hands and feet: the ends of our bodies most clearly visible to ourselves. These are nudes conjured from the inside out. The immediate impression in the Los Angeles-based painter’s first institutional show in the UK is of categories collapsing in an orgy of body parts. Quarles’s titles both reinforce and undermine this, playing on the slippages in puns and misapprehensions like Carefully Taut (2019), Let Us In Too (Tha Light) (2018) or By Tha Skin of Our Tooth (2019), with its muddle of singular and plural, and bleed between flesh and bone. The ecstatic blurring of Quarles’s paintings is underpinned by the artist’s experience as the light-skinned, queer, cis-gendered daughter of a black father and white mother, with all of the readings and misreadings of her identity that entails. Set against brash, upbeat chequerboard, harlequin, dogtooth and spotty 2D backgrounds, Quarles’s bodies are cut up and interrupted by abruptly shifting planes and perspectives. Cut to Ribbons (2019), for instance, references the swimming pool paintings of David Hockney, a selection of whose work from the 1960s can be seen in the adjoining galleries. Slicing across what could be a many-limbed single figure or two embracing bodies with one head are three planes of blue: a solid bold bar of acrylic, an expressive wash and finally the twirling white-on-blue ribbons familiar from Hockney. If the anything-goes physicality of Quarles’s figures suggests freedom, the world they inhabit has clear zones and boundaries, not least the edge of the canvas itself, against which they often lean or push. It’s also a world that draws attention to its own construction, with Quarles using contrasting painterly techniques and references to establish her own hybrid art-historical lineage. Textured brushstrokes, thick smooth skins of shiny paint, stencilled patterns and airy spray coexist in a single painting, or figure. Nods to other artists stack up, from the young Hockney’s knowing play with abstraction and figuration to Maria Lassnig’s body-focused self-portraits. Quarles turns the push-and-pull between liberated queer subjectivity and externally imposed norms into an entanglement of bodies and environments. This tension between how we create ourselves and how others shape us, independence and dependence, affects the relationships between the figures themselves, too. In her delicate, droll line drawings, lovers with mingling outlines pine for one another (‘aint no sunshine when she gone’ reads the writing on one midriff) while attempting to establish boundaries. Hold Up (2019), for example, evokes both the setting of limits (I need my space!) and mutual support. It’s a contradiction that speaks to how identity is formed and maintained, which Quarles articulates with wit and insight.
ArtReview℗Nan Goldin at Marian Goodman Gallery, London℗J.J. Charlesworth℗Reviews℗10/01/2020℗‘Sirens is not a normal show for Goldin, since it has not been a normal year’ – J.J. Charlesworth on the artist and activist’s latest show℗The photograph is of a pale-skinned young woman, from the midriff up, against a red wall. Her aquiline nose and high cheekbones appear in closeup. She wears only a body-ornament made of strands of cascading, filigree-threaded silver stars that fall from a headpiece down over her small breasts. Blonde hair scraped back, she looks down to somewhere outside the frame. This is Greer Lankton in Nan Goldin’s Greer modeling jewelry, NYC (1985). The transgender artist was, like the photographer, part of the New York demimonde of the 1980s that straight America repressed or ignored: lesbians and gays, transsexuals, drag queens, postpunks and artists. Hanging at the heart of this epic part-triumphal, part-elegiac show, Greer modeling jewelry condenses a recurring theme of Sirens: the inherent glamour of individuals who reinvent themselves. By taking on new appearances and personalities, they create a reality in which the norms of straight society can be ignored. Yet this reality is precarious, sustained by little more than friendship, mutual support and – behind the cascade of stars – human bodies that prove to be frail without the protection of wealth, status and conventional social institutions. In Sirens, death is always waiting out of frame: photographs from Goldin’s legendary 1985 slideshow and 1986 photobook The Ballad of Sexual Dependency are positioned alongside those from the 1993 iteration of The Other Side (a slideshow of black-and-white pictures of drag queens taken during the mid-1970s) and newly made videoworks. In the video slideshow The Other Side (1994–2019), for example, the previously elfin and sparkling Lankton is older and thinner, gnawed by anorexia; she died from an overdose in 1996. Goldin, who was surrounded by AIDS and addiction, survived. Although only just. Sirens is not a normal show for Goldin, since it has not been a normal year. During the 12 months since she joined Marian Goodman Gallery she has added to her status as a pioneering artist the role of crusading activist, having almost singlehandedly brought the US opioid crisis to the artworld’s attention by pointing the finger at the Sackler family made staggeringly rich by it. It was the Sackler-owned Purdue Pharma that, during the late 1990s, developed and aggressively marketed the opioid-based painkiller Oxycontin as a magic pill for long-term chronic pain; its success helped the Sackler Foundation become one of the most powerful philanthropic organisations in the artworld. Goldin herself became addicted to Oxycontin after being prescribed it to manage the pain of an injured hand: when the prescription ran out, she, like millions of addicted Americans, drifted on to street drugs. She got clean in 2017, and then she got angry, founding the pressure group P.A.I.N. (Prescription Addiction Intervention Now) and protesting the institutions where Sackler money was most visible. She had skin in the game: early in 2019, Goldin announced that she would boycott her own retrospective at London’s National Portrait Gallery if it did not turn down a £1 million grant from the Sackler Foundation. The museum acquiesced, and soon institutions around the world announced that they would refuse any further donations from the Sackler Foundation, which in turn indefinitely suspended its philanthropic activities. These events are alluded to in Sirens by a glass cabinet at the gallery entrance displaying P.A.I.N.’s recent protest and publicity materials. The show’s new works bookend the presentation of newly editioned prints from The Ballad of Sexual Dependency and The Other Side – from the bleak anger that runs through the new video Memory Lost (2019) at one end of the gallery, to the triumphant celebration of queer desire that thunders out of the short, quasi-pop video Salome (2019) at the other. Installed on three screens, Salome is both a cheerful homage to camp and a resilient two-fingers-up to the patriarchy. The lefthand screen collects three appropriated movie clips of Salome’s ‘dance of the seven veils’: two risqué black-and-white silent-cinema versions and the closing scene from Ken Russell’s thoroughly queered Salome’s Last Dance (1988), in which the veiled dancer finally strips to reveal that he is a proudly penis-waggling man. But what sets off Goldin’s bawdy cut-up Salome is the central screen: a looping early cinema clip in which a host of pancaked, eyelinered men in white tie and tails look agog – all expressionistic leering, gurning and jaw-dropping – towards the adjacent screen on which Salome dances. Merging into a Dalíesque cluster of staring eyes, these anonymous masculine drones lose their minds before the genderfluidity they both loathe and desire. “You know that it’s real if you feel that it’s real!”, choruses the driving electro soundtrack (John Robie’s One More Shot, 1990). And, just to remind everyone of the long history of sexual prohibition in straight culture, on the righthand screen Goldin tacks on a fragment of biblical Hollywood, in which the members of some royal court are punished by the Lord for whatever misdemeanour they have committed with a great storm that brings down the columns of their palace and sweeps them away. The glam exuberance of Salome gives way to the colder fury that trickles through Memory Lost, a video/photo essay that is a shadowy world of woozy, blurred and tenebrous stills, shots of burn-marked photographs haunted by the ghosts of Goldin’s opioid-junkie reality. White pills set out carefully on a hotel-room desk with the counting-house precision of the addict making sure she has enough to get through the ensuing days; crackling snatches of telephone conversations in which Goldin and her friends talk from the depths of depression and addiction. “What did you get?” asks a voice like Goldin’s. “All that you wanted,” comes the anonymous, defeated voice in reply. The sirens in Homer’s Odyssey were femaleshaped creatures whose seductive song would drive sailors mad, enticing them to wreck their ships on the rocks of the sirens’ island, thereafter to be eaten by them. The figure of Odysseus, binding himself to the mast and thus unable to respond to their call, has become a symbol of the overpowering nature of desire, of aesthetic delirium, of intoxication in general and of the misogynist figure of the woman as seducer and devourer of the male ego. But sirens are also the sound of alerts and alarms. In recording herself succumbing to the siren-call of legalised addiction, Goldin captures something of its lonely, suburban banality. Memory Lost touches on the social cost of the opioid crisis, although we really only catch glimpses of this through Goldin’s autobiographical lens – there is no social documentary here, apart from a snap of a printed sign in a pharmacy window that makes the panicked declaration ‘We do not sell Oxycontin here!’ There is little fascination, seduction, glamour or individual liberty to be found: only grimy hotels, winter landscapes, holes accidentally burned into mattresses and a little bottle of Oxycontin squatting in the dark confines of a hotel-room safe. The final new work is the video that gives this show its name. The origins of the found footage in Sirens (2019) are myriad, but the clips – of ecstatic hippies gyrating, of nightclubbers dancing in the gloom and, principally, of the almost extraterrestrially thin and glamourous features of Donyale Luna, the ‘first black supermodel’, whose star coursed through the films of Andy Warhol to the covers of Vogue – hark to an earlier historical moment. “We are stardust,” intones a singer in the soundtrack of songs accompanying The Other Side, and Luna shines with it, though she died of a heroin overdose in 1979. A sprinkle of stardust can’t protect these fragile bodies from the hostility of straight society. Especially once big pharma figured out that it was possible to make money from the war on drugs. During the opioid crisis, millions of Rust Belt and ‘flyover state’ Americans became addicted to prescription medications. They might have voted for Reagan, Bush or Trump; might once have despised the inhabitants of Goldin’s world. The artworld funded by philanthropic organisations including the Sackler Foundation remained largely indifferent to their suffering, and that political and cultural split stalks Sirens. The unfinished business of the culture wars is the exhibition’s blind spot, because, in the end, the suits got everyone, queer and straight. There’s no easy solution here, only a possible escape. The skylit upstairs gallery hosts a series of largescale prints, mostly vast depopulated landscapes, darkening horizons somehow still rich in colour. They might represent a departure from everywhere else depicted in the show, a last snap of the shutter to capture transcendence. Nan Goldin: Sirens, Marian Goodman Gallery, London, through 11 January
ArtReview℗Anna Maria Maiolino at Whitechapel Gallery, London℗Rosanna Mclaughlin℗Reviews℗06/01/2020℗Rosanna Mclaughlin looks back on the elusive Brazilian pioneer’s six-decade oeuvre – through 12 January℗Eggs are plentiful in Anna Maria Maiolino’s first UK retrospective. They are rolled across a table by two men in latex gloves for the film + – = – (Mais Menos Igual Menos) (1976), a discomfiting activity somewhere between a medical examination and a sport. They cover a pavement on which a blindfolded woman walks for the performance Entrevidas (Between Lives, 1981). They are photographed at the tops of stairwells, on the seats of chairs and resting between thighs.  Imperiled but never broken, Maiolino’s egg reads variously as a symbol of the fragility of life under an oppressive regime, motherhood, female reproduction and the claims made upon it by men. Born in Italy in 1942, Maiolino moved with her family to Venezuela when she was twelve years old, and then on to Brazil. Entrevidas was performed in Rio de Janeiro in the final years of the military dictatorship (the first free elections for the national legislature since the 1964 coup were held in 1982). Documentary photographs of the event read like a pictographic formula for the tense political atmosphere: eggs + pavement + legs = treading on eggshells.  Not everything on show is as amenable to translation. This survey covers five decades of an often sibylline and introverted practice. In the downstairs gallery, painted shapes displayed in frames fill a wall like rudimentary hieroglyphs. Elsewhere, experiments with paper turn into private diagrams and drawings spiral into asemic writing. As I wander the rooms I feel like I’m looking at a draft alphabet for a language I cannot decode. At times this results in a kind of affective muteness, enhanced by Maiolino’s inexpressive style, which gives little away. Yet the muteness has its politics. In the central image of the photographic triptych É o que sobra (What Is Left Over, 1974), the artist holds a pair of scissors around her tongue. During the Brazilian dictatorship, critics of the regime were routinely murdered. Speak, the photograph seems to say, and you may be brutally silenced. The sentiment resonates today: President Jair Bolsonaro, elected in 2018 following a racist, misogynist and homophobic campaign, has openly praised the former dictatorship’s use of torture.  Despite the invocation of love in the exhibition’s title, and its promise of revolution, I find the emotional register forlorn, the atmosphere one of entrapment. At the entrance to the gallery is the site-specific installation Until Now (2019), one of a number of works in clay Maiolino has been making since the 1990s. Long strands of rolled, unfired terracotta are piled up like rusty chains. Their blankness, and their multiplication, call to mind a particularly abject sort of drudgery. One work in particular suggests a desire to flee. In the etching Escape Angle (1971), a black outline of a square is missing its bottom right corner. In this art of hidden meanings, a simple square could represent many things: a house, a country, a body, a prison, a shell. Through the gap, an almost-invisible shape oozes out, white on white.  Anna Maria Maiolino: Making Love Revolutionary, Whitechapel Gallery, London, 25 September 2019 – 12 January 2020
ArtReview℗The Posthuman City at NTU Centre for Contemporary Art, Singapore℗Adeline Chia℗Reviews℗03/01/2020℗Are we just playing at being ‘human’? asks Adeline Chia℗If you’re thinking of being laid to rest in a coffin, consider a biodegradable death suit instead. Footed and mitted, Jae Rhim Lee’s Coeio – Infinity Burial Suit (2016) might resemble a set of snuggly adult pyjamas, but the material is woven with the spores of a flesh-digesting mushroom which speeds up decomposition and neutralises any toxins released from the rotting body. Environmentally conscious burials are not new but Jae’s concept, which embraces morbid-sounding scientific research (she fed bits of her hair, nails and skin to various mushrooms to determine the most efficient strain) to achieve an ashes-to-ashes ideal, is refreshing. The suit, available to buy online for US$1,500, inaugurates a new fashion category: eco-friendly, post-mortem wear.  The blithe weirdness of this product is typical of an exhibition that draws on science and art to consider the world from a less anthropocentric perspective. The posthumanism of its title is a broader philosophical project that challenges the universalist status of the human subject and its separateness from nature, and its selection is generally utopic, proposing alternatives for a more diverse and interconnected world. A section features works that are part art-installation, part-functional design, aimed at improving human lives while minimising environmental damage. These include a portable water purification device that looks like a water wheel (Lucy + Jorge Orta’s Orta Water – Portable Water Fountain, 2005) and a series of procedures to transform wastewater from tofu and tempeh production into useable materials (Irene Agrivina’s Soya C(o)u(l)ture, 2014). How practical and scalable these projects are remains to be seen, but they are prototypes for an optimistic model of urban life with less wastage and pollution and better access to resources. Another recurring interest in the show is in forms of knowledge beyond anthropocentric, scientistic frameworks. This includes recognising the agencies and intelligences of other species, illustrated by Thai design practice Animali Domestici’s colourful tapestry of the country’s capital with snakes, pigeons and rats sharing the streets with humans (Bangkok Opportunistic Ecologies, 2019). Indigenous systems of understanding also get a look in with Marjetica Potrč’s Earth Drawings (2009-2016), which depict the cosmologies of communities in Australia, Norway and the Amazon in beautiful mind maps linking ideas, origin stories and places. Most of the works here promote neighbourly co-existence with other species, but the more exciting ones blur the line between humanness and animality, culture and nature – another key posthuman trope. Pierre Huyghe’s Untitled (Human Mask) (2014), a 19-minute video featuring a monkey wearing a noh-inspired mask wandering around an abandoned restaurant in the Fukushima restricted area, is a hypnotic, disturbing and at times weirdly touching classic of the genre. In different lights the macaque resembles a deranged woman, a restless child and a trained primate whose real face and nature remain a mystery. By mimicking human actions and yet not quite achieving perfect mimesis, the monkey invites and repels empathy. The video has been interpreted as portraying the inevitable subjugation of animals to an anthropomorphic gaze and emphasising the divide between human and animal consciousness. Yet the monkey’s playacting, the theorist Ana Teixeira Pinto has argued, also suggests that humanness is, like gender, at least partly performed. Nicholas Mangan’s Termite Economies (Phase 1) (2018) features another kind of interspecies collaboration. Mangan was inspired by a true story of Australian scientists researching the possibility of using termites to discover gold deposits, and created scale models of what these termite mines may look like. Rickety, soil-coloured and filled with skinny spirals, the structures blend insect architecture with the underground tunnelling systems of human mining sites. Some of them, their forms generated by swarm software, look like honeycomb cells. Others, with their cockscrew tunnels, evoke theme-park waterslides. But then again, I’m looking through human eyes. A complete paradigm shift might mean abandoning such analogies altogether, a more radical undertaking for which this exhibition is only a starting place.
ArtReview℗Kameelah Janan Rasheed at Brooklyn Historical Society, New York℗Megan N. Liberty℗Reviews℗03/01/2020℗Megan N. Liberty listens to sound art inspired by the society’s ‘Muslims in Brooklyn’ oral history collection ℗Artist and educator Kameelah Janan Rasheed’s multidisciplinary practice engages with both the histories of institutions and the narratives they house. Her material is history, and she mines library stacks, archives and vernacular photography for her black-and-white collage installations that paste fragments of photocopied images and texts into the corners of rooms and across walls. As a black Muslim woman, Rasheed’s work often focuses on the absence and constraint of these identities and histories. ‘How do I create environments and opportunities that invite a nuanced, rigorous, ongoing engagement with histories that have been flattened and singular?’ Rasheed asked herself in the broadsheet published to accompany her installation at the New Museum in New York last year, which included publications related to the history of black alternative educational institutions and publishing in Oakland.  Her current installation at the Brooklyn Historical Society, An Opening – a translation of the title of the first chapter of the Qur’an – uses the society’s ‘Muslims in Brooklyn’ oral histories archive (comprising over 90 personal accounts collected during 2018 and 2019) as source material. The small gallery’s bright teal walls are scattered with framed inkjet prints, hung at varying levels, with scraps of collaged papers affixed directly to the wall, tucked into corners, lined up in rows and stacked at the edges of frames. Together, the prints and wall collages read like concrete poetry: ‘transatlantic almost misplaced the words’; ‘one feels the urgency’; ‘she read unfamiliar “terminology”’. Language fills the room, running across corners and forcing viewers to move with the words as well as read them. The prints similarly abstract language, with excerpted photocopied words and lines of instructional books dancing around the edges of geometric shapes. More Pronounced (2019) shows a central black triangle against a white back- ground, resembling a geometry lesson. It doesn’t include a mathematical formula, but instead the oddly spaced text ‘8. more pronounced’ and ‘life’. The suggested instructional quality of the prints and wall texts – heightened by the knowledge that Rasheed is involved in education and curriculum building – lends the gallery an immersive classroom atmosphere. Visitors carry an iPhone with headphones through which they can hear selections, triggered by the artwork they’re facing, from the oral history archive. “They get gifts because we do extra gifts for other children as well; you don’t have to be Muslim,” one woman explains about the Eid al-Adha and Eid al-Fitr celebrations as viewers look at More Pronounced. The range of stories and voices included in the exhibition reaches beyond the one-dimensional presentation of a religious and cultural community. The link between the audio and visual texts is nonlinear, with some words echoing in both, like the print that reads, ‘messy / words / happened first’ in a corner of the room where one hears a young man explaining, “Because we’re messy. You know, some of us don’t practice.” But most are tangentially linked, if at all – the audio clips weaving in and out of each other. Standing in the centre of the gallery, you hear multiple clips at once, a chorus of ‘ums’ and distant voices as the phone swings. Hearing them together rather than reading them, or even listening in a library, allows for unexpected connections. The installation offers and demands openness: visitors are asked to put on these headphones and to immerse them- selves in a culture that may not be theirs, and to be open to a nonlinear way of listening, reading and learning.
ArtReview℗Embodiment at Mitchell-Innes &amp; Nash, New York℗Rahel Aima℗Reviews℗03/01/2020℗Rahel Aima considers how the works of Pope. L, Jonathan Lyndon Chase, Cheyenne Julien and Tschabalala Self engage with identity, ancestry and sociopolitical issues℗Embodiment is a group show about the representation of bodies and how melanin translates to pigment: how to represent black, indigenous and other people of colour in a manner that exceeds visual depiction alone and speaks to identity, ancestry and broader sociopolitical issues. Questions of colour are most overt in four small drawings from Pope. L’s ongoing text-based series Skin Sets, each of which takes the format of ‘x people are y’. The aphorisms (Green People Are The Sky Above The City, 2010) and racialised stereotypes are matter-of-fact yet bear a curious generosity all the same. They are annotated with scribbles – ‘I’m talking about a continent of flesh, ya know!’, ‘the sun on retainer’ – that suffuse the reader with the sensation of sudden heat. In a much larger, earlier painting by Pope. L titled Gold People Shit In Their Vale (1995), legibility gives way to sage, grey, fuchsia and marigold, a palette that suggests a cactus in bloom. Occasionally the mixed-media drawings are terribly poignant, as with Blue People Are An Underwater Airport (2011), which invokes both the horrors of the Middle Passage and the popular Afrofuturist mythology of a black Atlantis – a hidden underwater city and space of liberation populated by the descendants of those who were thrown overboard from slave ships. By eschewing figuration for language, Pope. L seems to suggest that it’s more interesting – more fun even – not to depict the body at all. But the younger artists in the show provide exuberant evidence to the contrary. In Jonathan Lyndon Chase’s trio of largescale figurative paintings, a pair of men are seen shopping for watches, boots and rings. Chase is particularly known for his intimate and sometimes explicit depictions of queer black men, but here the figures are seen out in the world, in multiple overlapping perspectives. The display cases in particular suggest a kind of ‘Rubik’s cubism’ in which segments and details of the painting have been swapped or rotated. In one painting a man is seen with pecs on his back as he peruses flashy gold timepieces; in another he has genitalia where a bellybutton might be, his formerly green skin now shades of brown.  There’s more fragmentation in Tschabalala Self’s collaged paintings constructing black women’s bodies from neatly sewn fabric appliqués. In the aptly named Chop (2016), bodies are intimated through an assemblage of extremities: heads wearing manic grins, breasts and a grasping arm, each body part in a different skin tone. Coupled with Self ’s practice of incorporating excess bits of fabric from old works into new paintings, there’s a sense of identity as an amalgamation of everyone who has come before, an epigenetic predicated on admiration and strength instead of trauma. A number of dreamy self-portraits by Cheyenne Julien deploy colour to striking effect. She paints herself softly rounded and strong, whether having an out-of-body experience in the tub, looking down at her own supine body or sitting naked on the bed afterwards. Especially notable are the hot pink carpet and green soft furnishings of Can’t Go Out, Can’t Stay In (2019), which seem to glow so intensely that they are reflected in a pinkened shoulder, a smear of turquoise at the hairline. The work captures, with wry precision, the paralysing tension between the two selves that you could be – between the self-containment of staying with the soft furnishings inside and the siren call of joining the people lounging in the grass outside the open windows. Nearby, in Chase’s watch-shopping expedition, orange signs reading ‘out’ and ‘in’ propose that these options are one and the same.
ArtReview℗Time Is Thirsty at Kunsthalle Wien, Vienna℗Emily McDermott℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗An immersive group show transports Emily McDermott to the 1990s ℗Distant sounds echo in an empty lobby, bass rumbling through my body. At the top of the stairs to the exhibition space, a glass bowl filled with earplugs stands next to a sign warning of loud music. Save for the white walls and silent security guard in place of a daunting bouncer, the dimmed lights, cavernous space and pounding techno suggest the entrance to a club rather than a museum.  At first, the earplugs seem unnecessary. Hanging opposite the entrance is On Kawara’s Sept. 19, 1992 (1992), one of his iconic Date Paintings, next to Xavier Aballí’s 29 Okt. 2019 (2019), part of a painting series in homage to Kawara, counting the days since the artist’s death. Here, however, the works serve to neither establish nor reference the artists’ own timelines but rather that of the exhibition: everything on view, by some 34 artists, design collectives, musicians and writers, has been made since 1992 – the year that the Kunsthalle Wien opened. After this brief introduction, I head back to pick up ear protection, the soundtrack by British musician Peter Rehberg and Italian duo Vipra starting to prevent me from hearing my own thoughts.  Moving beyond Kawara and Aballí’s paintings, a dusting of iridescent blue glitter covers a patch of floor (Ann Veronica Janssens’s Untitled [Blue Glitter], 2015–), behind which six mannequins wear Fong Leng polyester tracksuits that could have been found in a warehouse of 1990s deadstock as easily as on the streets of present-day Berlin (Willem de Rooij, series with various titles, 2015). Behind the figures, and arranged in a grid, hang ten black inflatable PVC ‘canvases’ by Franco Mazzucchelli (all Bieca Decorazione, 2017). Although each is delicately heat-stamped with an abstract pattern, they appear here like a singular black mass of soundproofing foam. Lining the floor’s edges is Jason Dodge’s untitled, undated installation of over 200 glass jars in various sizes – some acting like petri dishes, collecting bacteria; others scrubbed clean, sitting next to abandoned lollipops, batteries, rubber bands and superglue. Elsewhere, Georgia Sagri’s vinyl 3M stickers graphically replicate and enlarge the appearance of their titular subjects – fresh bruise, open wound, deep cut (all 2018) – while Anna- Sophie Berger’s time that breath cannot corrupt (2019) suggests traces of visitors: three garments on the floor are covered with dried, cracking mud, above them the brown imprints of having once been wet and thrown against the wall.  This is the detritus of a party, attendees and their actions frozen in time, with an occasional scoop of intel from the outside world. A curatorial intervention, for example, has resulted in the display of six oversize prints of articles published by The New York Times, topics ranging from race riots in Los Angeles, to Germans protesting violence against migrants, to climate change. The articles resonate as though they were written yesterday but are all from the 1990s. Such a confusion of time and space is, apparently, precisely what curator Luca Lo Pinto wished to instil, writing that, since the 90s, ‘the future and past seem set in some kind of loop’. In the exhibition booklet, Lo Pinto continues: ‘From [the 1990s] on, there is seemingly nothing culturally significant that hasn’t existed before, albeit in slightly different guises.’ If that’s true, the exhibition proposes neither answers nor speculations. As the sole visitor, I feel like I am alone at Berghain, the DJ finishing their set as the shades begin to open after nearly three decades of lost, forgotten time; my mind and body unsure where to go or what to do next.  Time Is Thirsty at Kunsthalle Wien, Venna, through 26 January 
ArtReview℗Patrizio Di Massimo at Kura, Milan℗Barbara Casavecchia℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗In a series of new paintings, the artist pursues his theatrical staging of the characters populating the artworld and art history, writes Barbara Casavecchia℗Patrizio Di Massimo’s oil paintings are well-oiled machines of conceptual playfulness. They make me think of the historical Italian theatre genre commedia dell’arte – whose name is easily mistranslated as ‘the comedy of art’, when ‘the comedy of profession’ is closer. Indeed, the protagonists here – at this nonprofit, Cura magazine-affiliated space – are artists, art professionals and art history. The London-based Italian artist presents them as characters dressed up in gaudy, trendy costumes, frozen in dramatic poses, against theatrical sets enclosed by velvet curtains. The palette is bold, the outlining sharp, the detailing clinical, as if under a spotlight. Love, hate, wrath and desire abound, together with spectacle, histrionics, melodrama and irony, as in the comic plays performed by the likes of Harlequin, Columbina or Pantalone. As in Mozart’s Don Giovanni (1787), libido is a prima donna of Di Massimo’s stage, where nudity, enslavement and bondage embody the sadomasochistic implications of all relationships. It’s a theatre of the self, where the classic ménage à trois between Me, Myself and I – aka Ego, Id and Super-Ego, in Freudian terms – is interpreted by personifications of the artist himself, his wife (the curator Nicoletta Lambertucci) and their family and friends, attired in different guises.  Di Massimo’s new paintings add to his ongoing ‘quarrel series’. In Prussian Love (all works but two 2019), the two contenders are collectors Alan Prada and Fabio Cherstich; in Bauhau, it’s the artist Goshka Macuga and her partner Nabil Bouhir, who grip each other’s clothes in front of their dog (‘bau-bau’ is how a dog barks in Italian). Di Massimo also plays with art history: Macuga’s Adidas tracksuit, for instance, is decorated with Roy Lichtenstein motifs, while Epico Cavalleresco (After Joseph Paul Blanc) [Knightly Epic (After Joseph Paul Blanc)] appropriates kitsch mid-nineteenth-century French art pompier, substituting the Christian knight Ruggiero with a fierce Chinese youxia she-warrior in the role of the rescuer of the seductive Angelica. In Untitled (Green Triptych) Di Massimo appears variously unclothed or scantily clad in lingerie, enslaved to female dominatrices, amid torture and pleasure. If the erotic imagery clearly pays homage to the brothers Balthus and Pierre Klossowski (whose wife Denise served as model for Roberte, the serial protagonist of the artist’s titillating compositions), the surreal, suspended atmosphere of the scenes refers also to another famous pair of Italian painters and brothers: Giorgio de Chirico and Alberto Savinio, whose Monumento ai Giocattoli (Monument to Toys, 1930) has inspired Di Massimo in the past. The lesser-known magic realist Antonio Donghi comes to mind too, with his eerie repertoire of clowns, jugglers and carnivals that peaked during the years of the fascist regime.  In the monumental Self-Portrait as abstract painter (after Annie Leibovitz) Di Massimo casts himself as the alter ego of a famous comedian. Reproducing a 1981 Rolling Stone cover, it depicts Steve Martin in a white tuxedo smeared with black paint, posing in front of a large black-and-white composition by Franz Kline (an artist present, at the time, in Martin’s own collection). Di Massimo, instead, turns Kline’s black into a fruity, feminine, gelatolike pink. To me, though, the key to the entire show lies in the smallest and most intimate portrait of the group, installed in front of the entrance, like an overture. Diana (6 months) depicts the artist’s newborn child and her cartoonishly puzzled look, as if the adult world, and all its fantasies and ghosts, were nothing more than an opera buffa.   Patrizio Di Massimo, Kura, Milan, 25 September – 20 November 2019
ArtReview℗Daniel Pitín at Galerie Rudolfinum, Prague℗John Quin℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗John Quin is unsettled by the artist&#x27;s eerie paintings, which blend art-historical and cinematic references℗A woman’s head is seen in profile, hair as sleek as an otter’s. She bobs up, as if mid-breaststroke, amid thick smears of aqua paint: this is Swimming Pool (2019), a highlight of Daniel Pitín’s substantial show of paintings and videos. The pool appears otherwise abandoned, like some relic of the good life, a signifier of societal decline. The woman’s body tips ambiguously, and indeed the scene feels only half-real: while there appears to be water directly around her, the ‘pool’ looks drained, and quite possibly not a pool but something else. She flattens into it, and the ochre concrete floor merges at the edges with junk, detritus made from scraps of collaged newspaper. The woman is Romy Schneider in Jacques Deray’s La Piscine (1969).  The Prague-born Pitín is fond of splicing two realities in one image: he melds art-historical and cinematic references in a variant on the Verfremdungseffekt, a dissection of illusion. Swimming Pool began as a maquette made from cardboard and coloured paper: the painting based on it was constructed using bits of glued newspaper and then overpainted to deliver its half-finished appearance. The artist exposes his methodology like a magician showing a trick’s mechanics. More cinematic referencing occurs in another large painting, 237 (2018). We are creepily drawn through multicoloured portals, our gaze traversing variously shaped apertures cut into a sequence of walls (reminiscent of Gordon Matta-Clark’s work), to encounter an ill-defined naked female figure holding, perhaps, a shower rail. Scratches on the canvas obscure her face, rendering her ageless; her body seems to drip with water. Suddenly there’s recognition and horror too: it’s that room 237 and that succubus thing from Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining (1980).  Lee in a Bath (2016), a sister image, catches the photographer Lee Miller blithely washing herself in Hitler’s tub as if scrubbing away evil. Pitín interrogates voyeuristic moments while suspending them: what are these lonely figures up to? In Window Blind (2017) a seated man and standing woman have their backs to us. They focus on events in front of them, things we cannot make out. As with the aforementioned paintings, such realism emerges from a hastily constructed set. Near-abstract blocks of grey and black are crisscrossed with white stripes; Pitín’s palette is muted, freighted with implicit dread. Again memory is triggered; we may remember this as a scene from Alfred Hitchcock’s Rear Window (1954): the man is James Stewart, the woman Grace Kelly.  Pitín quotes the same film in Broken Windows (2019), one of two video installations here. Scenes from the movie are projected through small apertures cut inside a tatty cardboard model of a housing block, decorated with paint smears. The scale discombobulates: the effect is like micropsia, like looking down the wrong end of a telescope. A shockingly grotesque moment arrives when Kelly’s face is seen smeared with pigment. The other video installation is weaker: Rotations (2019) features Robert De Niro as seen in Martin Scorsese’s Taxi Driver (1976), and we’ve been there too often. Pitín’s real strength lies in his paintings, and the show concludes with a bravura display. In Between Spaces (2014), another monumental canvas, shows an empty room with an enormous expanse of parquet flooring. Summer in the City (2019), even larger, presents the frontage of a building like that seen in Rear Window, now bent and ripped like another cardboard model. Balcony (2008) is perhaps the most impressive work: the reflection of a streetlamp and the shadowing of said balcony give the architectural feature a dark sense of the sinister, appropriate in this most eerie of cities.   Daniel Pitín, A Paper Tower, Galerie Rudolfinum, Prague, 26 September 2019 – 5 January 2020
ArtReview℗Katya Shadkovska at Trafostacja, Szczecin℗Phoebe Blatton℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗Phoebe Blatton on the Warsaw-based artist’s filmic portrait of an emergent Russian subculture℗I first encountered a video by the Russian-born, Warsaw-based artist and activist Katya Shadkovska at her gallery, Lokal_30, in Warsaw. Julia (2016) exposes, via the subject’s testimony, the oppression of a transgender sex-worker in St Petersburg and her brutal treatment by the police. An intimate, claustrophobic film made with the rough urgency of a video uploaded from inside a warzone, it’s typical of Shadkovska’s portraits of marginalised figures: unfussy and chaotic, hard-hitting yet unnervingly open to interpretation.  Her latest video, Yeltsin Death Brigade / Freedom or Boredom (2019), is about the Yeltsin Death Brigade, a subcultural movement that emerged in St Petersburg circa 2014. Its members, mostly male and youngish, were children when their parents experienced the ‘shock-therapy economics’ of postcommunist Russia. Youthful distance goes some way to explaining their nostalgia for Boris Yeltsin, first president of the Russian Federation, from 1991 to 99, who, as a YDB member explains, was “a true anarchist… he just broke down the USSR, started drinking, and it was dope”.  Appropriating Soviet, Nazi and religious symbolism and donning oversize rubber masks of ‘Das Boris’ (one hypnotic scene shows two topless masked men tenderly embracing each other), YDB posits Yeltsin’s reign as a brief moment of freedom between the mental grip of the Soviet state and Vladimir Putin. In a domestic setting, three men, semidisguised in black hoodies, squash together on a sofa. “We are rightwing antifascists and leftwing nationalists. We are homophobes, sexists, macho-ists, nationalsocialists, feminists and LGBTQ,” they declare, illustrating YDB’s exaggeratedly absurdist, looping opposition to every shibboleth of the left or right. Elsewhere they cry “Inshallah!”, aping ISIS videos, the next moment donning Israeli flags – a typical expression of YDB ‘logic’.  The exhibition, in a black room with spotlit YDB merchandise and ephemera mounted on the walls, might suggest a ‘trolling’ of the sombre ‘dialogue of upheavals’ exhibit at Szczecin’s National Museum, and of the fetishising, historicising effect of ‘the institution’. Screens show further interviews with YDB members, one obsessed with “ass-fucking”, and the varying reactions of antifascist activists to the YDB. This is a provocative exhibition in Poland, where state interference in cultural institutions tracks an unfolding ultraconservatism with worrying echoes of developments in Russia. This is acknowledged in the video recording of the Speech to Poles (2019), made by Anatoly, an eccentric older guru-figure. Comically declaring himself for “P.U.T.I.N! The Party of Ultraright Transgenders and Naturals!”, Anatoly is seen being led on a leash through the streets, readily inserting a bottle up his rectum to prove he couldn’t care less if the police do it to him. This recalls a particularly East European strain of extreme performance art, or the (again) trolling activities of Tranzytoryjna Formacja Totart, The Orange Alternative or Łódz´ Kaliska. But Shadkovska – without endorsing the YDB – would argue that, as a grassroots subculture, Anatoly and his friends are far more transgressive and emancipated.  Nevertheless, Anatoly himself suggests a degree of masquerade in identifying as LGBTQ , and the notion of emancipation is subtly probed in the main video’s final scene. At a YDB gig, the camera fixes on one of the few, almost always silent young women who feature. Seemingly alone, texting, as though demonstrating to herself and others that she isn’t truly alone, she sways self-consciously, eyes lifting to the stage as she mouths lyrics learned by heart. Her T-shirt is emblazoned with the image of the old white man who represents that moment of freedom when, as one YDB member puts it, “you could slap a bitch in the face, and no one would do a thing about it”. A man jostles in front of her, oblivious and absorbed in his own pleasure. The credits begin rolling over her young face, her fingers still clamped around her phone.   Katya Shadkovska, Yeltsin Death Brigade, Trafostacja, Szczecin 17 October – 17 November 2019
ArtReview℗Alexa Karolinski and Ingo Niermann at Auto Italia, London℗Nina Power℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗Two docufictions by the artist duo prompt Nina Power to ponder the possibility of an egalitarian access to love℗Welcome to the Military-Emotional Complex. In two ‘docufiction’ films, Army of Love (2016) and Oceano de amor (2019), Alexa Karolinski and Ingo Niermann gather ‘propositional regiments’ to address a pressing but tricky need: to be loved. If you bring a group of diverse people together who want to give love, or receive it, or both, can you create a cuddle-cult to change the world?  Half a century after the last wave of free love, desire remains a problem for any egalitarian project: there will always be some more ‘fuckable’ or ‘loveable’ than others. Desire discriminates despite the good intentions of its bearer – “I like men who have long hair and beards”, states one woman during one of the interviews in Army of Love. “I have an unusual body,” says a disabled man as he receives a massage, “and it’s fucking unattractive.” So can society, or art, make up for sensual injustice? The ‘First Code of Ethics of the Army of Love’, developed during a ‘training camp’ held by the artists in Utrecht in 2017, and available at the exhibition, states that ‘soldiers have to offer love to people they might not like in the first place, [and] they also have to seek consent’. To give love that is fair and decommodified, you should give up on preference as well as exchange. But is asking people (even with their consent) to get over the specificity of their desire ethical or even possible?   The larger question of whether anyone has a right to sex (or love) is a fraught one. State-mandated intercourse is the stuff of nightmares, but kindness still exists, despite the best efforts of an alienating and individuating culture. Karolinski and Niermann push an activist approach, breaking with the passivity imposed by dating-app algorithms and consumer capitalism. Both films present interviews with the ‘armies’ about their various desires and opinions. In Army of Love, filmed with the participants in a fancy-looking indoor swimming pool, a sometimes-naked group of people carry each other in the pool, or hang about wearing fetish-gear, discussing, in often emotional terms, what they find attractive and what other people find attractive about them. (One blind man describes how women feel safe with him because he cannot ogle them.) In the Cuba-based film, Oceano de amor, the lives of the ‘soldiers’ are more on show. We see army members at work, or caring for family, or fitness-training in the park. They are asked about their lives and about automation – the idea that robots will soon replace human workers, which might allow more time for love. Most of the participants are not keen on robots: “Maybe for the Japanese, but the Cubans are not into that”, says one. Another suggests that socialist Cuba has always had more time for love – not least because of all the blackouts. From a technophilic, capitalist point of view, Cuba’s socialist collectivism seems outmoded; but from a human point of view – from the standpoint of love –  it is paradise: the final sequence of the Cuban love army dancing on the beach and playing in the sea is truly magnificent, and it is unlikely that robots, however sexy, would prove so moving.   But the audience is left with a question: why, after supposed sexual liberation, has sex and love become such a problem? Free love without larger social change will always remain a kind of pity-plaster. Can we admit that life and desire were unfair from the off, or that while we might succeed in the abolition of social inequality, this might not entail the surrender of the curious, singular and enigmatic specificity of desire?    Alexa Karolinski, Ingo Niermann: Army of Love, Auto Italia, London, 4 October – 8 December 2019
ArtReview℗April Dawn Alison at SFMOMA, San Francisco℗Fanny Singer℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗Fanny Singer on the mysterious double life of a photographer, and their posthumously discovered archive of Polaroid self-portraits ℗It takes a moment for the impact of these Polaroid self-portraits to register, given that each is no larger than the palm of your hand. Step closer, look more intently, and you’ll be met by an astonishing artistic vision. April Dawn Alison was the private persona of an Oakland-based commercial photographer known to familiars as Alan Schaefer (1941–2008). Her public debut is drawn from a collection of more than 9,200 photographs, virtually all of them self-portraits, taken over more than 30 years and discovered on the artist’s death by artist Andrew Masullo, who purchased them from an estate liquidator and donated them to SFMOMA. Together, they chart the evolution of April Dawn Alison, into whose frippery and face-paint Schaefer slipped after hours, and always in secret. A horizon line of clustered frames – some containing single images, others thematic groupings arranged in grids – illustrate three decades of exploration, experimentation and exultant self-actualisation. Indeed, Alison is often pictured holding other Polaroids of herself, as if caught in the act of witnessing her own inception. Polaroids offer instant gratification but also, crucially, privacy (no one else would be developing the film). While the photographs were left undated, and largely unsigned, there is an implicit chronology to the display: we begin with a more tentative black- and-white Alison, captured on the earlier and more beautiful Polaroid film, her transformation limited to a wig and falsies. From the late 1960s, Alison gains in confidence and panache, her set-ups diversify, grow increasingly narrative and, in a series of bondage-themed images, veer into gymnastic terrain. The choice of environment and costume is often droll, more William Wegman than William Eggleston: standing, back to the camera, amidst the strewn streamers of an empty party; a housewife surrounded by domestic paraphernalia; a French maid smoking. Alison collected wigs, loved clothes, favoured high heels.   The material fluency doesn’t come as a surprise – Schaefer would have used Polaroids to check composition or lighting in his commercial work. Still, it’s impossible to know to what degree Alison was aware of queer predecessors like Claude Cahun or Pierre Molinier, whose photograph Les jambes de Jean Meunier (1972) finds echo in Alison’s many fetishised, stockinged legs.  Likewise, the drama of Alison’s poses, their implicit narrative and conflation of artist and subject recall the auto-scrutinising work of Cindy Sherman in the 1970s. Then there’s Andy Warhol in drag in 1981 or Robert Mapplethorpe in bondage in 1974. Whether or not Alison was looking outside for inspiration, she had a keen understanding of what makes a good picture.   An arresting sense of humour prevails: many images show Alison posed on her back, legs splayed, feet in the air, her face contorted in mock horror or feigned surprise. Others show her from behind, as if their creator were eager to see how she appeared to the world: svelte waist, shapely legs, form-fitting skirts, a mane of freshly brushed hair – a woman, unmistakably. The question of whether these images ought to have been displayed given the private nature of their production has dominated the discourse surrounding this exhibition, but risks eclipsing the work itself. What is most striking about April Dawn Alison is that she could – in private and with no expectation of display – be so committed to her art as to leave behind a repository so vast, compelling and provocative.    April Dawn Alison, SFMOMA, San Francisco, 6 July – 1 December 2019
ArtReview℗Zadie Xa at Tramway, Glasgow℗Daisy Lafarge℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗Korean folklore meets ecological precarity in the artist’s retelling of a matrilineal myth, writes Daisy Lafarge℗“All creation legends are true”, claim the narrators of Zadie Xa’s film Child of Magohalmi and the Echoes of Creation (2019), part of her multimedia installation at Tramway. This rejection of singular narratives is reflected in the exhibition’s multiplicity and excess, encompassing film, sound, painting, sculpture, costume and performance. Through the combination of these elements, Xa reanimates the myth of Mago(halmi), a giant goddess who, in Korean folklore, is said to have created the world. In Xa’s hands the marginalised story of Mago is both a recuperative and speculative gesture, clamant with ecological portent.  Plunging the smaller of the gallery’s two spaces into darkness punctuated by colourful spotlights, Xa has carpeted the room and filled it with pseudo-aquatic sculptures: oversize resin conch shells and orcas, including an enormous denim orca, ‘Granny’, which demarcates the space. The effect is subaquatic but kitschily so, more Seapunk than a po-faced statement on ecology. According to the handout, ‘Granny’ is named after a real-life orca matriarch whose pod is under threat, but also serves as seating from which to comfortably watch the film that dominates the space.  Child of Magohalmi… is a mesmeric, narratively disjointed and at times slow-moving film, best absorbed in intermittent doses. Combining choreographed scenes and animation, its imagery ranges from a masked figure on a beach (Mago) as she creates the world from sand, water and her own bodily excretions, to pastel-hued kelp overlaid on waves. The film is at its most compelling when these sequences coincide with other elements of the installation, such as animated orcas leaping through a night sky, or the narrator’s mention of amethyst quartz, as the resin conch shells emit an eerie violet light.  Unlike Korean folklore concerning male deities, Mago’s story was never written down but transmitted orally through generations of women. The film’s self-interrupting narrative and onomatopoeic repetitions of “echo”, “gurgle” and “splash” vocalise Mago’s suppressed matrilineal narrative. Through the figure of this abject, terraforming goddess, Xa connects the excretions of the body and the accretion of land in a mutually fertilising cycle. It is Xa’s painting of Mago, however, that effects the presence of the goddess most strongly – only on a close look do you notice, nestled between the folds on Mago’s forehead, a half-closed but piercing third eye. This painting and the more handmade aspects of the installation – including denim orca-embellished costumes worn by performers dancing to Janggu drum rhythms on the opening night – bring a lightness and humour that balances out the comparatively self-serious film and its ambient soundtrack.  The array of references Xa draws on are at once conceptually alluring and politically salient. Allying a neglected matrilineal mythology with current ecological precarity, Child of Magohalmi… is a celebratory and ritualistic retort to patriarchal, monotheistic and Western-centric creation narratives and their progeny, found in present-day attitudes towards environmental extraction and destruction. While the exhibition may lack convincing aesthetic cogency, the powerful and provocative figure of Mago(halmi) – and her various incarnations by Xa and her collaborators – is defiantly unforgettable.  Zadie Xa, Child of Magohalmi and the Echoes of Creation,  Tramway, Glasgow, 26 October through 15 December
ArtReview℗Rosemarie Castoro at MAMCO, Geneva℗Martin Herbert℗Reviews℗01/01/2020℗Martin Herbert on the bittersweet story of the under-recognised American artist and activist ℗By now it’s a familiar narrative. An artist is too slippery, too changeable, to find renown in their own time. In ours, when elusiveness and volatility are retrospectively seen as virtues, and dealers and curators are scouting for inventory and clout, they’re rediscovered, and the revaluation and institutional shows begin. It’s bittersweet. But Rosemarie Castoro, this retrospective suggests, was likely temperamentally unsuited to the kind of career-building repetition and articulation that would have made her a star. In mid-1960s New York, in her mid-twenties, she’d already mastered a sharp hybrid of Pop aesthetics and Minimalism’s attentiveness to the body, making hot-coloured abstract paintings centred, first, on a repeated Y-shape, like myriad arms outspreading from torsos. After a couple of years, she segued into big monochromes constructed from diagonal stacks of pencilled lines, their length seemingly related to her arm span. Actually, they’re longer – Castoro folded and unfolded her canvases to make her sweeping gestures – and this mix of objectivity and withholding ambiguity would recur through subsequent excursions into Conceptualism, performance, installation and sculpture.  In 1968, the same year she was completing her cycle of paintings, she was also making drawings like Portrait of Sol LeWitt with Donor and Friends – more sloping, pencilled lines within a grid – which represents its eponymous scene, and mixed hints of sociability and business, about as clearly as your average Howard Hodgkin canvas. By 1969 she was typing intervallic descriptions of her day (‘From leaving stoned out of my mind to look for someone to buy me a whip… from the search for a whip to the finding of a friend’), which suggest an offstage dialogue with Lee Lozano, as do handwritten works on graph paper. Castoro’s SoHo loft, we know, was a meeting place for figures including Agnes Martin, Carl Andre and Yvonne Rainer. The following year she made installations (the walk-in box Room Revelation, in which an inverted light fixture in the centre of the floor slowly illuminates when the door is closed, like a secret whispered in an upside-down gallery) and street performances.  It’s hard to tell, then, whether Castoro in these years was a pioneer or a weathervane. By 1972 she’d moved onto less classifiable stuff: weird, relieflike ‘paintings’ in greyish modelling paste, like standalone gestural strokes or extremely shambolic Frank Stellas. Three years later she was deep into sculpture, the paired Land of Lads (1975) and Land of Lashes (1976) offering, respectively, a row of wobbly black ladders and a parade of spidery false eyelashes, the titles punning on the gender concerns that frequently shimmer within Castoro’s art. The 1979 Flasher sculptures make this clearer still. Wrapping big sheets of aluminium partway around her body then painting them black, she here abstracted and reclaimed a flasher’s overcoat, formally conversing with Richard Serra while pointing more largely to malefemale power relations.  A very late work like Mountain Range (2004–08), a brigade of labialike black aluminium sculptures, might give a viewer whiplash if they then return, in the looping set of rooms this show occupies, to the fizzy abstract canvases at its outset; at the same time, though, with the female body ghosting both ends of the show, there’s a sense of bookending. It’s unavoidably ironic that the wilful, high-intellect shapeshifting preserved in between, that which seems likely to have undone Castoro’s profile during her life, is now what gives this show its abiding electricity: call this the next-best outcome. She died with barely a ripple in 2015, Galerie Thaddaeus Ropac scooped up her estate soon after, and, well, here we go again.  Rosemarie Castoro, MAMCO, Geneva, 9 October 2019 through 2 February 2020  
ArtReview℗Videobrasil at SESC 24 de Maio, São Paulo℗Oliver Basciano℗Reviews℗27/12/2019℗Oliver Basciano on the representation of marginalised communities at Brazil’s film-festival-turned-art-biennial – through 2 February℗Imagined Communities, the 21st edition of Videobrasil, takes its title from a 1983 book by Irish political scientist Benedict Anderson that describes nationality, ‘nation-ness’ and nationalism as ‘cultural artefacts of a particular kind’. For the curators of this film-festival-turned-art-biennial, with its admirable and longstanding focus on artists from the ‘global south’, they are artefacts long-past their sell-by date. Instead, at SESC’s new downtown arts centre, and in the accompanying cinema programme, the viewer is presented with examples or propositions for postnational communities (‘in the minds of each’ such group, to borrow Anderson’s words concerning national identity, ‘lives the image of their communion’), as well as, in the case of the seven indigenous artists and collectives, those identities forged prior to the colonial imposition of a nation state. A video by Brazilian artists Paulo Mendel and Vitor Grunvald stands out. Domingo (Sunday, 2018) documents a group of young gay and trans friends living in a poor neighbourhood on the outskirts of São Paulo. Cans of cheap beer in hand, at times deploying Pajubá, the Brazilian Portuguese gay cryptolect, they joke and mess around on the streets. As an impromptu party gathers, these charismatic characters decide to end their weekend by attending a protest against then-president Michel Temer in the centre of the city (“I want to show up on TV, fag,” one boy says to another). For most of its 25-minute duration, the work hinges on the dialogue between subjects, but as it draws to a close, we lose track of the kids amidst volleys of teargas deployed by the police as the protest turns into a riot. On the wall behind Mendel and Grunvald’s video, playing across two monitors in the centre of the gallery, is Syrian-born Hrair Sarkissian’s Execution Squares (2008). To the right hangs Ojibwe painter Jim Denomie’s O the Reservation (or Minnesota Nice) (2012). The former consists of a series of large-format photographs of empty crossroads and public spaces in Aleppo, Latakia and Damascus, all of which have been the sites of public hangings. Denomie’s work is a vast painting depicting the 1862 battle between United States armed forces and the Dakota people, who had revolted against starvation and enforced poverty. In response, 38 Dakota were hung in Mankato, Minnesota (the largest mass execution in the history of the US). All of these works demonstrate the extent to which the state will act in order to protect its sovereignty. Likewise demonstrating the fealty demanded by the nation-state is Roney Freitas and Isael Maxakali’s Grin (2016). Shown as part of the daily film programme (screened in a makeshift auditorium; while previous editions of Videobrasil were held at one of SESC’s much more spacious arts venues across town, as well as in a local cinema, this edition felt cramped at times, and the audiovisual quality suffered), the 40-minute film tells the story of the Guarda Rural Indigena, a military platoon made up of men from the Maxakali tribe forcibly conscripted during the early 1970s (and made to police and subjugate their own people) by the Brazilian military dictatorship.  Though the curators happily allow the exhibition a freedom to go off on tangents concerning nature (Paul Rosero Contreras’s excellent Dark Paradise: Humans in Galapagos, 2016–19, which mixes magical realism with pointed questions concerning the ecology of the titular islands) and urbanism (Georges Senga’s photographs of Congolese houses at the centre of inheritance disputes, alongside his pictures of houses in Brazil marked for sale), among other subjects, it is identity politics that underpins much of the show. This is unsurprising given that the exhibition takes place in a country experiencing the white heat of a culture war, in which, when the new culture secretary, Roberto Alvim, says things such as, ‘Like the Crusaders, we are fighting barbarian invasions against the principles and values of our Judeo-Christian civilization’, it is impossible not to take sides, however destructive the polarisation of society may be. Intractable division lies at the heart of Omar Mismar’s Schmitt, You and Me (2016–17), which consists of the owner and the manager of a gun shop in Skowhegan, Maine, reading aloud ‘The Concept of the Political’, a 1932 essay by rightwing philosopher Carl Schmitt. Clocking in at just under an hour, this might not sound like the most entertaining of prospects, but what unfolds is a slow, humane portrait of two white working-class guys struggling through this dense treatise on the nature of power. At times commenting uncomfortably on the text in relation to North America’s current divisive relationship with the Arab world (Mismar is from Lebanon), Schmitt’s claim that community is formed through the identity of an enemy seems not far off the mark in these divisive times. There’s an unexpected warmth between the subjects and filmmakers that undercuts the German’s philosophy however: a suggestion, at the risk of sounding like a glib, happy-clappy liberal, that we might have more in common than divides us (these connections are only imagined, remember). Of course, the other perspective, to quote a resident of a tiny underpopulated South Korean island profiled in Ellie Kyungran Heo’s filmwork Island (2015) as hordes of daytrippers descend on his remote idyll, is to shrug, “Ugh, human beings”. Take your choice.
ArtReview℗Song Dong at Pace Gallery, London℗Valentina Bin℗Reviews℗20/12/2019℗Valentina Bin munches her way through the Chinese artist’s edible artwork℗“Cool jacket, looks edible!”, a cashier complimented me a few days ago. Edibility is a quality increasingly associated with enticing things and ideas, such as rampant modernisation, development and – apparently – our outfits. The sugar-coated promises of urban regeneration can be destructive, though. Riding on this admonition, Song Dong’s survey opened at Pace during ‘Frieze week’ with an iteration of the project Eating the City, touring since 2003, which invites the audience to consume a cityscape made of confectionery. Cities are fragile palimpsests, and when the old ways are lost, there is no turning back. Connoisseur of sweets that I am, I made my way through a hoard of smartphone-wielding art students and collectors in Italian suits to the real delicacy: the sour apple belts – my enjoyment of these went unopposed, since the punters seemed more excited by the thrill of destruction than by gluttony. Few things unleash Eros and Thanatos – if not straight iconoclastic impulses – like a combination of participative art, ravenous Instagram feeds and biscuits within a white-cube environment. Song’s practice is not all candies and gimmicks, though. The Beijing artist, raised during the Cultural Revolution and graduating in fine art the year of the Tiananmen Square protests, has the ability to comment with candid poetic immediacy on the cultural and political context of his homeland, while also speaking to universal themes. The appeal and limitation of Song’s practice lies in the transposition of quotidian observations into wider meanings, through a generous use of digestible visual metaphors. Some might find this clarity moving, refreshing and effective. Others may find it easy, verging on banal; one doesn’t exclude the other. For example, in the Mandala series (2015), approximative renditions of Buddhist mandalas are traced using seeds and spices, as a celebration of the everyday; Writing Time with Water Beijing (1995), the photographic documentation of a performance in which Song writes the time on asphalt with brush and water, is an attempt to capture a fleeting moment and a remark on the impossibility of defining time; the video Broken Mirror (1999), in which the artist points a camera at a small glass mirror before smashing it with a hammer and revealing the street scene hidden by the glass (including the puzzled expressions of passersby), hints again at the rapid change of the Chinese urban landscape; the Sketch series (2015), consisting of enlarged copies of found shards of porcelain, with the original fragments’ measurements noted in blue glaze, is a prosaic commentary on the beauty of waste and the unprofitable.  In 2005 Song Dong started touring the Waste Not series, a collaboration with his mother in which they organised her entire accumulation of possessions as a series of installations. Simply laid out, folded or piled up were used toothpaste tubes, plastic bags, bottle caps, wrecked furniture and more and more and more. Song Dong sees the wu jin qi yong mentality (translated as ‘waste not’ in English) not just as a characteristic of his mother’s morals and psychology, but of a whole generation of Chinese people, maybe a way to hold on to the past while coping with future uncertainty through the comfort of material hoarding. This ability to comment on social issues starting from the familial and the personal seems watered down in his serialised later works, such as the centrepiece of this exhibition, the installation Same Bed Different Dreams No. 3 (2018), which gives the show its title. Visitors can peep through the shiny reflective surfaces of Song’s signature combinations of salvaged window-panes enclosing found crockery, hanging lights and knickknacks arranged on a double bed. Here, photogenic sentimentality turns the symbolic resistance of a collection of garbage into a polished, collectible artwork. Without the radical tenderness, this sanitised version is unconvincing as the vortex of Song’s first survey in the UK. Same Bed Different Dreams No.3 seems to suck the energy out of the earlier works in order to corroborate its own value, as if the cherry on top had swallowed the whole cake.
ArtReview℗Soto. The Fourth Dimension at Guggenheim Bilbao℗David Trigg℗Reviews℗20/12/2019℗David Trigg on the kinetics of the late-Venezuelan artist – through 9 February℗Those unfamiliar with Jesús Rafael Soto may be intrigued to learn that his works have been known to induce vertigo and dizziness. Considering that the Venezuelan-born artist, who died in 2005, is regarded as fundamental to the development of kinetic art, it is even more surprising to discover that his reliefs and sculptures rarely move; their shimmering, vibrating and rippling is illusory, generated by the viewer’s own movements in tandem with the artist’s perceptual ruses. In Bilbao the full scope of Soto’s output is covered by this generous 60-work retrospective, which tracks his ocular investigations over five decades. With so many Sotos crammed into a single space, the giddying show leaves you sensing that the French critic Jean Clay was on to something when he claimed, in the first issue of 1960s art magazine Robho, that ‘Kineticism is not about “things that move”, but the awareness of the instability of the real’. Soto’s association with kineticism stemmed from his inclusion in the pivotal 1955 exhibition Le Mouvement, at Galerie Denise René in Paris. Yet, wary of labels, he resisted being identified with any movement. His small wall-based works from this period are more closely aligned to Op art (though he refused to participate in moma’s fabled 1965 exhibition The Responsive Eye). Take the dazzling concentric patterns of La Spiral (The Spiral, 1955), or the fluttering geometries of Structure cinétique (Kinetic Structure, 1955), which utilise interference patterns on Perspex overlays to create disorienting visual effects. Soto ran and ran with this concept, achieving similar outcomes with assorted combinations of wires, rods and threads set against striated supports. Fundamental to all these propositions is the interplay of lines – a simple conceit resulting in considerable optical complexity. The denouncement of Op art and kineticism as frivolous was of little consequence to Soto, whose practice thrived on intellectual rigour. As he explained in 1974: ‘Art should evolve with the same seriousness as philosophy, mathematics, and scientific research’. And yet, as retinal fatigue sets in, there’s a niggling feeling that perhaps Soto’s dissenters were right. Nowhere is this felt more than in his seductive walk-in sculptures begun in 1967, which he called Penetrables. The experience of walking through the curtain of suspended rods in Penetrable blanco y amarillo (White and Yellow Penetrable, 1968) feels as hollow as the Perspex cube into which you are led. The initial radicalism of these works has evidently faded over the decades. Conversely, Soto’s attempt to represent movement, vibration, light, space and time – or at least the relationships between them – reached its pinnacle with his Progressions and Virtual Volumes series. Floor-based sculptures such as Doble progresión azul y negra (Blue and Black Double Progression, 1975) and Duomo centro rosso (Red Centre Dome, 1997) appear to dematerialise as ascending and descending rods mingle in a hallucinatory sequence of flickering undulations. In 1965 Soto attached small black-and-white squares to a column of pinstriped rectangles. As you approach the wall-based work, the protruding shapes shimmer and vibrate. Soto repeated this stratagem on varying scales, culminating in 1996 with a huge version incorporating differently coloured squares. In contrast to the visual befuddlement experienced elsewhere, the appearance of movement in these untitled works is slight and genuinely startling. As you sway, marvelling at the optical effect, you begin to become acutely aware of your own embodied condition – every quiver and micromovement. John Cage taught us that there is no such thing as silence; similarly, Soto’s most affecting works reveal the elusiveness of stillness and the ubiquity of motion.
ArtReview℗Liang Luscombe at Sutton Gallery, Melbourne℗Rosemary Forde℗Reviews℗20/12/2019℗Rosemary Forde on the artist exploring racial and gendered stereotypes in film℗Installed against a canary-yellow wall, a comedy of manners plays out onscreen in Liang Luscombe Sweaty Scales (2019). Exploring the impact of racial and gendered stereotypes found in film, television and advertising media, this playfully structured narrative video features two central female characters who navigate their individual identity and sexuality through a quagmire of pop culture imagery that fetishises and typecasts Asian women. The result is an interrogation of the Western, male gaze from a contemporary, intersectional perspective. With critique delivered through observational humour and conversation, Luscombe places fresh characters against a familiar backdrop of pop culture genres such as the rom-com and web series. The highly stylised 30-minute video focuses on the social scene and self-conscious musings of young creative characters in an unnamed us city. Scripted scenes portray a thirtieth birthday party, dinner dates, seduction and sexual fantasy, building a loose narrative of romance between Oliver (Caucasian-American) and Lisa (Asian-American), who have been introduced by mutual friend Julie (also Asian-American). The scenes take place against a brightly coloured backdrop of makeshift props and sets, and are intercut with shots of a narrator (the artist) speaking directly to camera. “Oliver would often get quite sweaty when he would dance at parties…,” says the narrator. This becomes an ongoing and unflattering visual gag, as the pair go on a date (to a Chinese restaurant) and Lisa gets concerned about how much Oliver seems to be sweating. When Lisa tries to talk about her career, as creative director of an advertising firm, Oliver swiftly turns the conversation to his sexual fantasies involving an elaborate ‘dragon lady’ costume. The sweating becomes more profuse as this conversation, and Oliver’s initially low-level creepiness, escalate (hence the title, Sweaty Scales).  Intercut with the action are photographs of iconic imagery of Asian women, including 1930s film star Anna May Wong, an originator of the dragon-lady stereotype – a typically Chinese femme-fatale, portrayed as an enigmatic or deceitful seductress. A scene from the 1960 film The World of Suzie Wong is also included. Set in Hong Kong, it stars William Holden as Robert, an American architect/artist, and Nancy Kwang as Mei Ling (a prostitute who poses as a virgin and becomes Robert’s model). The appropriated film clip cuts to a re-creation with Lisa and Oliver in costume playing the roles of Mei Ling and Robert as they meet on the Star Ferry. Cinema has a long history of whitewashing and yellowface, which sadly continues. For all the buzz around Asian-American stories and actors taking the lead in Hollywood productions – Crazy Rich Asians (2018), Always Be My Maybe (2019), The Farewell (2019) – it has not been long since a pale and blonde Emma Stone was cast as a mixed-race Chinese-Hawaiian character in Aloha (2015). Luscombe has highlighted yellowface in a previous videowork, She inches glass to break (2018), which refers to Mickey Rooney’s clownish Japanese character in Breakfast at Tiffany’s (1961), a performance often overlooked in appraisals of the film and Rooney’s career. In a reversal of the cinematic gaze, the male character is reduced to a trope rather than a rounded character: Oliver is a Woody Allen-esque skinny guy with glasses whose confidence is wildly out of balance with his talent and social grace. In sex scenes the actor is replaced with a puppet, delivering a literally wooden performance. Glimpses of the puppeteer on camera further undermine the artifice of constructed narratives and performed identities that, in this comic pastiche, Luscombe so effectively critiques.
ArtReview℗Weight of Abundance at Zeller van Almsick, Vienna℗Max L. Feldman℗Reviews℗16/12/2019℗Max L. Feldman is confronted by society’s consumerist hunger℗The theme of this year’s ‘Curated by’ festival, during which Vienna’s galleries invite international curators to make exhibitions, is a gift for Àngels Miralda. With the tripleheader Weight of Abundance, she interprets the given theme of ‘circulation’ through what Karl Marx called the ‘circulation of commodities’. This, Marx explains in Capital (1867), is ‘the starting-point for capital’, wherein money is not just the way value and prices are measured, or the medium through which things are bought and sold, but the means of acquiring more money as an end in itself, backed by social power. Under Miralda’s auspices, each artist gets one room in the gallery space for their take on this.  Eli Cortiñas pries into the secret lives of commodities and their relation to power. Three works from her collage series From an Ethnological Museum Revisited (2018) show indefinable objects made from different parts of ancient artefacts (bits of statues, pottery, jewellery) grafted onto modern goods. The video Walls Have Feelings (2019), meanwhile, juxtaposes archive clips of dictators, factory workers, police brutality and John Carpenter’s film They Live (1988) with fragments, read by an actor, from the writings of Franco ‘Bifo’ Berardi, Silvia Federici, Achille Mbembe, Zygmunt Bauman and Frantz Fanon. The piece is clear and cluttered at the same time, sending out mixed messages in different voices, all presented as if they are saying the same thing. Levelling the authors’ different approaches ends up emptily commanding us to resist the forces of manipulation – whoever and wherever they are – like a simple reversal of those slogans demanding obedience from They Live. Débora Delmar is more concerned with the grim toil on which the joy of new purchases depends. The five objects in the l.u.x.u.r.y. Time series (2019) are shoebox lids bearing the name of luxury brands (Versace, Louis Vuitton, Chanel, Dior, Gucci), on which clock mechanisms are mounted. It turns out, however, that these logoed shoeboxes aren’t genuine at all, just knockoffs found in Beijing’s Chaowai Market. There is a joke in there somewhere. The target is the ‘consumer’. But which one? It could be the audience for contemporary art, or the one whose desires are spurred, if not created, by the lustre of brandnames and logos. It could be both at once. After all, just looking at Delmar’s phony trinkets shows up the viewer’s own symbolic capital, since they will either know the products are just simulacra – imitations of an idea of luxury – or not. Delmar’s Commercial Space series (2019) brings us right back to materialist critique. These twill jackets, printed with images of luxury department stores and hung on mannequins – the endpoint of the cycle of production and consumption – remind us first that luxury goods are made by the hands and sweat of real workers (often on the same production lines as clothing destined for discount stores), and secondly that the textile industry is capitalism at its most brutalising.  Nicolás Lamas’s contribution mostly consists of 23 curious sculptures made from mangled consumer goods – old sneakers filled with straw or cactuses, a glass jar containing the remains of a human skull placed inside a laptop’s motherboard, plastic toolboxes with animal bones where the hammers and screwdrivers should be – displayed on an installation of metal shelving units. It’s like a mausoleum for faded desires. The issue is, then, not just how to narrate culture. Rather, by showing us the battered corpses of commodities, Lamas interprets circulation in terms of natural cycles of life and death. He asks if libidinal investments meet the same fate as the things we once wanted so badly, not only growing grey and less supple, but dying and putrefying. Weight of Abundance at Zeller van Almsick, Vienna, 13 September – 21 November 
ArtReview℗Kaari Upson at Kunstverein Hannover℗Raimar Stange℗Reviews℗16/12/2019℗Raimar Stange considers how domestic spaces hold memories℗The house as metaphor for the relationship between a female inner world and a male outer one – written into art history by Louise Bourgeois’s drawing Femme Maison (1946–47) – is a leitmotif of Kaari Upson’s survey Door, Open, Shut. The first sculpture encountered is the Californian artist’s Balcony (2011), a latex cast of balcony railings from her longstanding thematic fixation, the burned-down house of a man called ‘Larry’. Larry – notice the phonetic similarity to Kaari – is a fictional character based on a deceased neighbour of her parents’ in San Bernardino, a person Upson never met. Her multipart series The Larry Project (2007–12) explores her interest in Larry’s life and sexual preferences. Employing an approach conceptually neighbouring that of Sophie Calle, Upson laces her research with fiction and filters it through various media. Here, her imagination has been captured by a dead person, reminiscent of the spectral Madeleine in Alfred Hitchcock’s Vertigo (1958).  The next room shows the film In Search of the Perfect Double (2016–17), in which Upson, changing tack a little, traces her own biography. She’s trying to reconstruct her friend Kristine’s long-gone childhood home as meticulously as possible. Since the house was mass-produced, she searches for houses of the same type and compares them to the ‘original’ house; she does so, in this oppressive proposal, by passing through the rooms, touching the walls with her hands in a manner reminiscent of Bruce Nauman’s videos – and frequently bumping her head on the ceiling, recalling through sheer physicality a place of early childhood memories and impressions. She nevertheless fails to find the ‘perfect double’.  The kunstverein’s main space shows the pair of 2012 sculptures Mirrored Staircase Inversion (San Bernardino). To create these, Upson dug a hole on Larry’s property in the shape of her memory of his stairs, in order to build a cast negative imprint using a mixture of dirt and latex. The work is reminiscent of Land art – its title like one of Robert Smithson’s, though its use of sculptural negative space again looks back to Nauman – and at the same time part of her preoccupation with Larry, whose original house is interesting to Upson since it was modelled, by its owner, on Hugh Hefner’s legendary Playboy mansion and thus enables her to question collective male fantasies. (The stairs were a copy of the ones leading up to Hefner’s private rooms.) The show closes with House Worry (2019), a version of which was also shown at this year’s Venice Biennale. The video alludes to the psycho-trashy aesthetics of Paul McCarthy, a known idol of Upson’s, but charges his aesthetic with her own unique narration. Here the artist and her aforementioned friend Kristine act as each other, appearing identical and different at the same time. Their roleplay, which hints at so-called family constellation therapy, is staged in a lifesize puppet house they played with as children. One of them crawls out of the fireplace, the other one sits on the table; together they sit on a rocking chair, dressed in sexy- nurse costumes, discussing (among other things) their experiences of puberty.  In Upson’s psychonarrations, modified appropriation and her own invention lose their ostensible contrariety, comparable to the relationship between a collective cultural memory and individual perception. The narratives in Door, Open, Shut present a bold yet sensitive mix of psychology and fiction, research and acting out: a psychotic tour de force in which the sometimes-deserted, other times lively spaces and the people performing in them are charged with an emotional strength that repels and fascinates. Here the doors of reception, as it were, are continually and excitingly being open and shut. Translated from the German by Liam Tickner  Kaari Upson: Door, Open, Shut at Kunstverein Hannover, 7 September – 17 November
ArtReview℗Limp at Galerie Emanuel Layr, Vienna℗Rahel Aima℗Reviews℗12/12/2019℗Does framing queer imagery as transgressive silo sexual minorities, or does it keep the straights safely out? asks Rahel Aima℗In Michael Curran’s 1994 film Amami Se Vuoi, the artist lies down naked on a table. He smokes a cigarette gauntly, and asks someone off screen to cue the titular ballad. Another man, muscled and clothed this time, leans over him and proceeds to methodically spit into his mouth until the song ends. Details register blurrily and woozily: arm hair in the light, a ball necklace reminding the viewer that gravity still exists even as Curran strains upwards. Watching this short feels like being surprised by bits of eggshell in your soft-boiled egg. Tenderness, violence, followed by nervy duende. The men are enacting a fantasy culled from Jean Genet’s 1946 novel Miracle of the Rose, previously editorialised in the closing scenes of Todd Haynes’s 1991 film Poison. While both interpretations share a certain ecstatic quality, a sense of transcendence via transgression, Curran’s is quieter, and far less exuberant. How does it end? Biceps straightens himself out of frame, leaving Bony with a half erection. It’s one of the most extraordinary works I’ve ever seen. Limp, curated by Paul Clinton (as part of Vienna’s ‘Curated by’ festival) and featuring seven artists or collectives, is full of such moments of interrupted circulation that deftly circumvent both sentiment and cheap thrills. To the treacly liberal adage that ‘love is love’, it offers the noncommittal titles of Curran’s aforementioned work (which translates as ‘love me if you want’), and disappointment (1994/2019), a fleece printed with a portrait of a man flung over a chair. At its core is the pertinent question of whether framing queer imagery as transgressive operates to silo sexual minorities. Or does it keep the straights safely out? This tension is made literal in Richard John Jones’s The Nightmare Having A Nightmare (After Ingo Swann) (2017), which greets the viewer at the show’s outset. Banners featuring bare-assed men, and the odd upside-down cross or American flag, are tied to a steel scaffolding structure draped with camouflage netting. The banners are bordered by thin strips featuring phrases repeating like ticker tape, such as ‘without a reflection I cease to exist’. Crucially, the libidinal frustration extends to the artists too. If Jones’s structure suggests the frisson of public voyeurism, Liz Rosenfeld’s video liz/james/stillholes (2005/2017) on a nearby wall provides some contrast. The artist tries to cruise porn-shop glory holes, is denied on account of being a woman but tries to sneak in anyway, opining on gender with her interlocutor and the differences between lesbian and gay culture along the way. “Judith Butler is sitting in the car with me right now! Judith!” she shrieks playfully at one point, before grousing that “gay men are so afraid of their culture being taken away from them”. Perhaps we all understand – at least on some level – that representation is not the same thing as reparation or transformative justice, and that neoliberalism has all but neutered its radical potential. But while the mainstream might have snatched culture, there’s always history, seen here in some early General Idea works, and a compelling vitrine of queer-theory texts. Still, the works in this show are sexy without ever becoming a spectacle. Even when they gently mock these boundaries through humour, as with the smorgasbord of winky beefcakes in Robert Blanchon’s supercut let’s just kiss + say goodbye (1995), it’s all innuendo and no action. Projected large against one gallery wall, the video features a parade of masculine archetypes-cum-fantasies: doctor, sailor, cowboy, guy-next-door and so on. Each encounter is cut short. Coupled with the schmaltzy soundtrack, it serves as a sobering reminder of the aids epidemic, which casts its long shadow over the show as a whole. But viewed today in the age of streaming services, it equally suggests scrolling or flipping through categories of porn. Just horny and bored; nothing to see here. Limp at Galerie Emanuel Layr, Vienna 13 September – 31 October  
ArtReview℗Torbjørn Rødland at Kiasma, Helsinki℗Mike Watson℗Reviews℗12/12/2019℗The artist’s new photographs and videoworks make further steps into spirituality and esotericism, writes Mike Watson – through 5 January℗The strength of Torbjørn Rødland’s Fifth Honeymoon resides in the artist’s deft avoidance of a particular genre or thematic foundation, leaving a range of interpretative pathways open to the viewer. The 35 photographic works and one video blend esotericism, abstraction and symbolism via still lifes, landscapes and duo portraits. As befits the work’s implicit mystic underpinnings, they feel koanlike, the viewer’s response saying as much about themselves as it does about the artist. There are threads, nevertheless. Motifs are repeated, including marriage, rings, tarot cards, pairings of people and the number five, which – according to Rødland’s own previous statements – has special significance for the artist. The chromogenic print Ace of Cups (2017) depicts a chalice brimming with water. Referencing the Ace of Cups tarot card (symbolising passion and strong emotion), the cup fills the picture, yet appears located outdoors. The pool of water it stands in is infused with a bright natural light; again, one might be thrown back – amid swaying aesthetic pleasure – on one’s own preconceptions about the validity of the tarot.  Elsewhere, a series of three black-and-white silver gelatin prints, collectively titled Painbody (2015–18), employ double exposure, overlaying patterns featuring Christian crosses and paisley motifs onto a nude female body. The result is a rich tonal abstraction that encompasses the female figure, merging it with the design. Referencing Eckhart Tolle’s theory of the ‘painbody’ – a kind of negative emotional state people carry with them, marked by memories and experiences – the works suggest an inseparability between the model and the symbols overlaid upon her.  The tendency to point to spirituality via a luscious physicality continues throughout the show. Midlife Dilemma (2015) is one of several works depicting unequal or unusual pairings of models. In it, we see a muscular, bare-chested young man gripping a suited elderly man by the collar while turning his own gaze to the camera. Rødland has suggested that his age fell exactly between that of the two models at the time of shooting: the photo conveys the entwinement of opposites – a preoccupation of Eastern mysticism – though intergenerational aggression is strongly suggested.  Rødland’s first videowork in 11 years, the five-minute Between Fork and Ladder (2018), cuts together scenes of Californian and Norwegian landscapes and a log fire, accompanied by a female Japanese voiceover evocative of Japanese anime. The voice reads quotes from the American mystic Ken Wilber, with English subtitles: ‘This is a soul for whom the personal has gone flat / This is a soul on the brink of the transpersonal…’ Partway through the video, a boy in his early teens appears and, with scissors, cuts images of Pepe the Frog – a cartoon figure coopted by the far right in meme imagery, and more recently by the democracy movement in Hong Kong – from torn fabric wrapped around the tree branch he sits upon. As he does so, he sings a melancholic song: “What are you supposed to do / When everything is up to you? / The world’s been bright / The world starts spinning out.” The song reaches a point of high bravura coinciding with the boy holding aloft what appears to be an oversize dining fork as he sings, “Is it better to accept the loss, or fight the war at any cost?”  Could the video be a message of defiance in the face of malign political forces? A spiritual riddle? Or simply a documentation of teen angst? What seems clear, near-paradoxically, is that against our prescriptive era Rødland wants art to be a space held open, in which the prompts are the artist’s but the journey is the viewer’s.  Torbjørn Rødland: Fifth Honeymoon, Kiasma, Helsinki, 13 September 2019 – 5 January 2020
ArtReview℗Marcel Broodthaers at M KHA, Antwerp℗Martin Herbert℗Reviews℗10/12/2019℗Martin Herbert reads through the oeuvre of the late Belgian conceptualist, who dedicated his art to the undoing of constraining systems – through 19 January℗In 1972, four years before his untimely death, Marcel Broodthaers took an educational diagram of the sun and planets and modified it, lightly yet monumentally. He erased Earth, and next to the word ‘Soleil’ in the sun’s centre he wrote, in his elegant cursive, ‘politique’. The result, part of the larger work Soleil Politique et fig.1 fig.2 fig.12.fig.O fig.A, is economical code-jamming, both implicatory and oblique. M KHA’s massive survey uses it as a title to imply that Broodthaers’s practice always had political undertones, yet one could also argue that this artwork, and the show, remind us that although he quit writing poetry in 1964 after a decade of scribing, he never abandoned poetics. Or one could combine those readings and say that Broodthaers asked how poetry, filtered through art, might serve political ends related to the anarchic undoing of constraining systems. That unfastening extends to the curating here. The show is open-plan and there’s no clear chronology, recalling the artist’s own comment on one of his films, in a 1968 interview: ‘a rebus that you have to want to decipher’. Gazing around near the entrance, we encounter works such as Monument Public no 4 (1963), a precarious mix of Funk art and Pop involving a wobbly stack of egg cartons on a makeshift shelf, under which sit a Warholian cardboard box for a ‘US Astronaut Space Helmet’ and 1966’s Grande casserole de moules, an overflowing black pot of mussels. Mussels and eggs would recur for years, along with the artist’s own initials, as he fashioned an artistic identity that drew knowingly and wittily on both his native Belgium’s cuisine and the iconography of fellow countryman René Magritte – who appears in the giant print Magritte (1967) reading a Broodthaers exhibition pamphlet. All those shells, though, also suggest containment and, by extension, societal malaise. One modest relief, Le Problème noir en Belgique (The Black Problem in Belgium, 1963–64), features plaster eggs doused in black ink upon a copy of the newspaper Le Soir, whose headline pointedly concerns the Congo.  By 1968 Broodthaers had lit upon the museum as a locus for his concerns, beginning his multipart project Musée d’Art Moderne, Département des Aigles, an imaginary museum favouring invented categories, shown in fragments. Its artefacts are scattered through the show’s later stages: handmade signs used in making documented performances on the beach, grids of postcard reproductions of paintings chosen according to quixotic rules, wry vacuum-formed plastic signs for various ‘departments’. These bridge more explicit engagements with language, such as the vacuum-formed, cleanly graphic quartet Les quatre pipes (1969), which surrounds Magrittean pipes with alphabets going quietly haywire.  Outside of this, in his last years Broodthaers made slowly-clicking slide projections, featuring (again) his own initials or details of artworks, and largescale installations such as, here, Un Jardin d’Hiver II (1974), a parody of a nineteenth-century palm court featuring Kentia palms, a film projection set in a then-modern museum and suggesting surveillance, and framed illustrations of exotic wildlife harking back to colonialism. This works well as a sardonic oasis in the middle of a large room. Unfortunately the brilliant Décor: A Conquest from the same year – a surreal but allusive array of cannons, a floral cannonball, a rearing snake, racked weaponry, modern garden furniture – is shunted into an annex with a huge circular light overhead that shoves itself into the art. Striking, sure, but the wrong flavour of nonsense. That’s quibbling, though: Soleil Politique is a cornucopia of pointed disorder that informs both brain and gut that things don’t have to be as they are. In that regard, though yellowing in places, Broodthaers’s oeuvre appears largely impervious to time, and this retrospective feels like one giant, decades-spanning work.  Marcel Broodthaers: Soleil Politique, M KHA, Antwerp, 4 October 2019 – 19 January 2020
ArtReview℗Tala Madani at David Kordansky Gallery, Los Angeles℗Cat Kron℗Reviews℗09/12/2019℗‘Motherhood is here painted at its nightmarish nadir’ – Cat Kron on the Iranian artist’s new paintings and videos℗Shit, even for the most anal among us, is a powerful lede. Thus Shit Moms, Tala Madani’s second show at David Kordansky, commands our attention even as it makes explicit its impishly manipulative premise, a grotesque disavowal of common decency, the sort that filmmaker John Waters might thrill to. Madani’s exhibition of mostly oils on linen and a few animated shorts prominently features diapered putti, both male and female. The infants are coupled with golemlike maternal female figures composed of sludgy refuse who accompany them in various acts of childish horseplay turned abject. Madani is at her most acute when rendering these babies, their unsteady stances and protruding tummies delineated as tenderly as those of a Titian Christ. Yet it’s not the infants – who in the paintings Shit Mom (Quads), Shit Mom (Disco Babies) and Shit Mom (Dream Riders) (all works 2019) appear unabashedly fascinated by excrement, much as they frequently seem in life – to whom Madani invites our simultaneous empathy and disgust, but rather their female caregivers. Just as she courted female revulsion at the grotesquely enlarged and flaccid penises of the adult men shown in earlier works, here she plays on a gender-specific fear: the possibility of being a bad mother. A theme that has seen an upsurge of late in memoirs (part of what Parul Sehgal described in The New York Times last year as a ‘sudden flurry of fascination’ with mothers, especially at their most insecure and least sufficient), motherhood is here painted at its nightmarish nadir. Unsupervised babies roam what look like squatters’ dens, huddle in unlit warehouses or, most damningly, endure the caresses of mothers so squalid that, rather than wiping their offspring’s shit away, their touches leave brown smears. These scenes of digested matriarchs are somewhat abruptly intercut by largescale diptychs invoking the theme of cinema. As in Madani’s show at 303 Gallery in New York last year, depictions of projectors dominate the two largest paintings on view at Kordansky. In Corner Projection (Panic) a projector throwing a blurred vision of fleeing childlike bodies onto an adjacent panel is safely confined within the borders of the film screen. Meanwhile, in Corner Projection (Time), viewers appear to run from the projection much like the 1895 audience who purportedly fled the theatre when the Lumière brothers debuted their footage of a train appearing to be headed straight for their seats. In the last century of cinematic advances, filmmakers’ initial attempts to elicit physical responses from their viewers has been replaced by appeals to psychological triggers. Thinking about this show, I kept coming back to a scene from 1996’s Trainspotting in which the hapless Spud, a member of a crew of Scottish heroin addicts, emerges at his girlfriend’s family’s breakfast table after having discovered that he has shat the bed, and his subsequent mortification when her mother wrests the dirty sheet from him, splattering shit over the entire family in the process. The scene’s impact lies less in its graphic obscenity than its underlying pathos of having soiled someone’s mother. One has to remind oneself that (unlike with Waters, who notoriously did in fact make performers eat faeces) it’s only a movie. Madani invites a visceral response from her viewer. But her invocation of fictive cinema, and the distancing it provides, leads one to wonder if these works are meant as a sincere commentary on our maternal fears and hangups (both primal and evergreen) or as a mockery of them in life and art alike.  Tala Madani: Shit Moms, David Kordansky Gallery, Los Angeles, 7 September – 19 October 2019   
ArtReview℗Emissaries for Things Abandoned by Gods at Estancia FEMSA / Casa Luis Barragán, Mexico City℗Gaby Cepeda℗Reviews℗02/12/2019℗Gaby Cepeda on what happens when a group of contemporary artists infiltrate the late architect’s house℗Almost four years after its first exhibition, Estancia FEMSA / Casa Luis Barragán has cemented its spot as one of the few venues in the city where curators can be adventurous. The place demands it by virtue of being both not a white cube and at the same time a once-lived-in house designed decades ago – in what many, UNESCO included, consider a timeless example of Mexican modernism – by its creator, the venerated late Mexican architect Luis Barragán. Curators are granted permission to experiment with the house and its hallowed objects, continuously invoking and banishing the late architect’s ghost. For Emissaries for Things Abandoned by Gods, American curator Elena Filipovic was allowed to swap every art and art-adjacent object within the home for current, contemporary pieces by 16 international artists – guided by the question ‘what would Luis Barragán collect?’ if he were alive today and in the mood for shaking things up. The swaps kept a few ambiguous rules in mind: that the new works be related to the original works either formally or conceptually; that they occupy roughly the same space and be of the same scale; and that they not disturb the visitor’s experience of the house. Filipovic’s words in the show’s brochure assure us that the new objects reflect on the previous works’ ‘operational value’ within the very deliberate architecture, while not actually shattering the visitor’s impression of Barragán’s intentions.  This is a bit tenuous. There is no way that every art object picked by Barragán for his own home could be replaced without jarring. But some of these encounters, however clashing, do work. Where Barragán hung a large eighteenth-century painting of the Annunciation in his bedroom, in front of his bed, there now hangs Sons of Cush (2016), a striking image by American photographer Deana Lawson. In its centre, a black man, a father, sits holding his baby and staring straight at the spectator. He is surrounded by framed family portraits, a genealogical tree of the African region going back to the Garden of Eden and an anonymous hand holding a stack of banknotes. Also in Barragán’s room, an ivory crucifix is substituted with Lawsons’s Adorah (2008), a tiny print of a dead foetus resting on the white satin interior of its coffin. These work by their smart substitution of the Catholic divine with human godliness: family and sacrifice intertwined. Danai Anesiadou’s vacuum-packed objects, found at different places around the house, are also a highlight. Works like Deal with It Across All Levels and All Dimensions (2019), in which a plastic bag emptied of air flattens a plastic burger, Chinese rice noodles and a cast-iron skillet into a mishmash of textiles and golden accessories, manage to welcome the clutter and chaos of Mexico City that Barragán struggled to keep out.  The last room on the tour, Barragán’s spacious studio, contains all of the architect’s original possessions, and the revelations it holds mirror the feeling of getting an exam back after grading, when one confronts the errors in one’s assumptions. The system of art-equivalences imposes a constant mental math – try to remember what might have been in a given spot, think of what it shares in common with the new – which seems like it might be fun for a curator, but less so for a regular visitor who has paid 400 pesos and booked way in advance to be awed by Barragán’s well-advertised Great Taste. Perhaps the exhibition’s grave mistake is the assumption that its visitors will come for the art, and not just to bask in the presence of the famous ghost.  Emissaries for Things Abandoned by Gods, Estancia FEMSA / Casa Luis Barragán, Mexico City, 21 September – 15 December 2019
ArtReview℗Tang Jo-Hung at Taipei Fine Arts Museum℗Adeline Chia℗Reviews℗02/12/2019℗In the work of this Taiwanese artist, Adeline Chia sees deities, symbolism and mid-life crises℗A few years ago, suffering a loss of hearing and having exhausted all conventional treatments, Taiwanese artist Tang Jo-Hung consulted mediums to treat his condition. The experience subsequently inspired a series of paintings called Fairy, for which he won the First Prize at the Taipei Arts Awards in 2016. The paintings are pastiches of religious imagery, combining human subjects and a private symbology: a naked Jesus in boots, a priestess with fat lips blowing smoke and a Chinese deitylike figure riding a giant fish. While not easily read, the paintings’ immediacy – fearless brushstrokes and seductive hues – suggests the urgent transcription of divine visions. But things are not quite as they seem. The fish-riding immortal, for example, has the knot of a necktie peeking out from under the collar of his magisterial robes. A costumed medium? A salaryman attaining sainthood? In his introduction to the exhibition, Tang says he doesn’t believe in the spirits and gods of religion or folklore. ‘They only exist in a world where I fantasise that I believe in gods and I am occasionally devout.’ That might explain the enigmatic quality in these works: half-exalting, half-satirical. His Fairy series, as well as 41 other paintings, mostly from the past five years, are included in this survey. Tang’s style is predominantly influenced by Western modernisms, Edvard Munch-esque Continental expressionism and the gestural vigour of Abstract Expressionists such as Willem de Kooning. He also owes a debt to Pablo Picasso (Tang completed his art studies in Spain), in the fractured Cubist surfaces that blend portrait and landscape (White Old Guy. Star. Countless Mountains, 2019). Blue and Rose Period harlequins are recast into new archetypes, such as a man-child in a pointy hat being piggybacked by an older man (Set off. Go Down a Hill. The Elderly Piggybacks the Youth, 2019).  His subjects, meanwhile, draw from a variety of references: everyday life (The Goddess in Downward-Facing Dog is Looking in the Mirror at Herself, 2019), theatre (Holding up the Hat While Running in a Stage Play, 2018) and some commingling of the two (Waiter on Roller Skates, 2018). There’s also Napoleon blowing a trumpet (Napoleon Must Win, 2019) and Faust with three arms (Fausto, 2019). Most of the scenes are staged in a timeless nowhereland of the artist’s imagination; not all of them are immediately intelligible. Others are generic portraits of Westernised human figures, rootless, which could have come from anywhere. The work is more compelling when it draws explicitly from personal experience, such as the Old Man series – a midlife crisis described on canvas – which, the artist says, was the result of him hitting forty-five. A caustic sensibility informs Seek Divine Guidance (2019), which reflects on the search for magical cures. A slender, elongated man kneels in front of a little vase emitting smoke, gazing at a tendril of mist with salacious wonder. His body is thin and hungry, and his neck cranes forward like a turtle. During seances, Tang seems to say, the spirit being consulted may not be the most frightening creature in the room. The desperado is.
ArtReview℗Li Binyuan at Rén Space, Shanghai℗Jing Jin℗Reviews℗02/12/2019℗Jing Jin focuses on the performance art and repetitive actions of the Beijing-based artist℗“He has a fan club,” someone told me when I saw Li Binyuan’s face printed on a T-shirt. Six years ago, Sohu news site nicknamed Li ‘the young streaker’ following a performance in which the ‘naked’ young man was ‘running or cycling… just to release his stress’. I was impressed by what I read of this young man, still a student of sculpture at CAFA, Beijing, who sounded so full of energy even if he hadn’t yet found the best means of expressing it (Li added ‘stress release’ to his Wikipedia entry). At this solo show, the artist tests the limits of his physical energy by combining his training in sculpture with his performance works.  Rén Space is housed in a three-storey 1930s building that has been restored in the traditional Shanghainese style. Crossing its delicate garden on the way in, I suddenly heard a blast from Natural History (2019), a video recording of a performance by the artist at a disused factory in Tianjin. A screen on the wall shows the artist packing explosives under metal boxes filled with concrete, and then, having set a timer to detonate them, narrowly making his escape. He repeats the act as if it were a religious ritual. Beside the video lie several sculptures, their forms reproducing the exploded debris, representing the eruptive power of the moment and at the same time freezing it in the gallery space. Three more works on the first floor of the gallery develop this tension. In the performance Justice (2011) – shown here as a video – Li extends his arm, holding a burning firework towards the sky, frozen like a living sculpture. In Room (2019) Li ignites a strip of flammable material running across the floor and up opposite walls of a bare room with two open windows. He stands straddling this burning line, keeping calm as if looking at a still life. In Divergent Paths (2012) the artist sits in a swivel chair at a fork in a road, forcing passing cars to stop by throwing firecrackers as he twists around. In this work as in others, Li questions the context of art in the world by situating himself at the centre of his own small universes.  Li’s repetitive processes deprive every action, no matter whether it is dangerous or boring, of its conventional meaning. Rumor (2019), on the top floor, demonstrates his relationship to sculpture while reiterating that repetition is key to the artist’s narrative. In this sculptural installation, 600 giant golden arrows pierce ceramic human tongues, pinning them to the wall all around the room. The implication, perhaps, is that language fails an artist who is looking to find the body’s breaking points.
ArtReview℗Korakrit Arunanondchai at Secession, Vienna℗Ben Eastham℗Reviews℗02/12/2019℗Ben Eastham on encouraging openness of interpretation℗The stairwell linking the Secession’s foyer to the gallery showing Korakrit Arunanondchai’s videowork has been frescoed with long-stemmed green leaves and branches that curve up and over the walls and ceiling. The effect, for visitors still shaking off the Viennese drizzle, is to infuse this sterile connecting space with a resuscitating warmth and wildness. Onto this trompe l’oeil trellis (which chimes with the gilded foliage on the building’s famous dome) are hung several small unframed paintings executed in a naive style. They include portraits of the artist’s grandmother at rest and a winged figure whose slicked-back hair and green body paint suggest Arunanondchai’s occasional collaborator, the similarly attired performance artist Boychild. Both the portraits and the mural in which they are entwined incorporate dried flowers.  It seems apt that an artist so preoccupied with linking cultures, spaces and states of mind should use an interstitial space to join his life with art. The desire to integrate also drives the Bangkok-born, New York-based artist’s together with history in a room filled with people with funny names (2012–), screened in the darkened upstairs gallery. This regularly updated record of the artist’s life – realised through episodic narratives that fictionalise his experience, incorporating cameos from friends and family members – combines sincerity and irony, spiritualism and scepticism.  I enter during the third of five episodes in this ‘living archive’, presented here as a looping series on a single large screen. The artist’s surrogate is dousing himself in paint before pressing his bare torso onto a strip of denim, a routine inspired by the young woman who became a sensation after doing the same on 2012’s Thailand’s Got Talent. It prompts the question of whether this figure – who seems in some respects to embody an archetype of the heroic male painter now out of fashion, in others to subvert the related hierarchies of male/female and subject/object – is to be taken seriously. The answer, here and throughout the other short videos in this evolving archive, might be yes and no. The narrative shuttles between different registers and contexts: invocations of an omniscient being (or machine) called Chantri are juxtaposed with documentary footage of the artist’s ailing grandmother; fictional interludes featuring the artist’s twin brother interleaved with recordings of a startling performance by Boychild. By turns funny and moving, pseudy and irreverent, the effect is to disarm critical expectations.  That together with history is engaging, affective and eminently likeable makes the watcher more inclined to accommodate the sometimes-sophomoric speculations delivered in voiceover. The exhibition literature, for instance, informs the audience that denim serves here to symbolise how materials and ideas move across borders; but that serge de Nîmes was named for a specific place might also reveal how meanings are lost in translation. That contradictions are symptoms of binary thinking – and that Arunanondchai is frequently cited as challenging such separations – doesn’t make them go away. Instead their framing within a narrative means that the viewer is willing to dwell on them: to use these points of friction or irresolution, as happens in every philosophical and scientific tradition, as catalysts for creative thought. Ultimately, together with history is less a coherent philosophical programme than a revealing document of a young artist’s evolution. This is to its credit. The work’s spirit of openness prompts the idea that we might be advised to interpret the world and other people generously, to look for and share connections, and to act always in good faith, even if that faith must partially be blind. Which is to say that, in an age of complexity, anger and division, the thread that binds us is compassion. Sounds sensible to me.
ArtReview℗Mit Jai Inn at Silverlens Gallery, Manila℗Josephine V. Roque℗Reviews℗02/12/2019℗In the Thai artist’s work, ‘movement and transformation play out in tandem’, says Josephine V. Roque℗Mit Jai Inn’s first solo show in the Philippines (his work was included in a group show, also at Silverlens, last year) sees the Chiang Mai-based artist continuing his experiments with the painted canvas as movable object via three new bodies of work.  In Actants, movement and transformation play out in tandem. These vivid, striped, unframed, open-ended paintings play with the experience of space and scale by encouraging the audience to move around them and, in some cases, to touch and change them. Making good use of the gallery’s high ceilings, Screens (2019) is a group of enormous chalky white and colourful canvases cut into strips like banners and displayed at various widths and lengths. The works, hung from the ceiling, surround the viewer – who can pass under and around them, to a canvas at the far side of the room, which extends o the wall and along the floor to form an L-shape. That these works are painted on both sides – meaning there is no back or front, no right side from which to view them – completes the experience of being engulfed. In another room, a series of three wide beltlike strips of canvas hang from the wall, their ends placed side by side, forming a half loop or a twisted, colourful necklace (Loops, 2019). Each loop is further split into strips, with each of those painted with a combination of two or three textured shades that make looking at the work similar to figuring out the interconnecting blocks of a Rubik’s Cube. Dream Works (1999/2019) comprises tiles of frayed and slit canvas mounted on the wall into a grid so that they appear to form a larger work. Previous works from the same series are also present, showing how a canvas tile with slits might be folded in myriad ways. The artist uses oil paint, linseed oil and a palette knife to make his work layered and stiff enough to hold its form without a stretcher, yet pliable enough to take on another shape. In another series, titled Scrolls (2019), rolled canvas works are displayed on their edges like unravelling spirals. The insides of the scroll are painted in colourful vertical stripes, while the outsides are predominantly white with neon streaks of colour on a textured surface similar to rocky soil or tree bark. The same flow of movement and displacement can be seen in the two Patch Works (2019, one with thick, sandwiched ribbons of canvas and the other interspersed with blank spaces). In both wall-mounted works, loose strips are woven and tied together, or left casually unspooling on the floor, alluding to cultures that use ribbons as markers for blessings and celebrations.  In narrative terms, ‘actant’ refers to the archetypal and binary roles that structure stories – hero and villain, for example; something demonstrated by Mit, not only through the tension created by his woven, cut and frayed canvas strips, but also through the artist’s trespassing of the restrictions and boundaries of what a painting, sculpture and audience could and should be.